Chapter 9
Shelob's Lair
 It may indeed have been daytime now, as Gollum said, but the hobbits could see
little difference, unless, perhaps, the heavy sky above was less utterly black, more
like a great roof of smoke; while instead of the darkness of deep night, which
lingered still in cracks and holes, a grey blurring shadow shrouded the stony world
about them. They passed on, Gollum in front and the hobbits now side by side, up
the long ravine between the piers and columns of torn and weathered rock, standing
like huge unshapen statues on either hand. There was no sound. Some way ahead,
a mile or so, perhaps, was a great grey wall, a last huge upthrusting mass of
mountain-stone. Darker it loomed, and steadily it rose as they approached, until it
towered up high above them, shutting out the view of all that lay beyond. Deep
shadow lay before its feet. Sam sniffed the air.
 'Ugh! That smell!' he said. 'It's getting stronger and stronger.'
 Presently they were under the shadow, and there in the midst of it they saw the
opening of a cave. 'This is the way in,' said Gollum softly. 'This is the entrance to the
tunnel.' He did not speak its name: Torech Ungol, Shelob's Lair. Out of it came a
stench, not the sickly odour of decay in the meads of Morgul, but a foul reek, as if
filth unnameable were piled and hoarded in the dark within.
 'Is this the only way, Smeagol?' said Frodo.
 'Yes, yes,' he answered. 'Yes, we must go this way now.'
 'D'you mean to say you've been through this hole?' said Sam. 'Phew! But perhaps
you don't mind bad smells.'
 Gollum's eyes glinted. 'He doesn't know what we minds, does he precious? No, he
doesn't. But Smeagol can bear things. Yes. He's been through. O yes, right through.
It's the only way.'
 'And what makes the smell, I wonder,' said Sam. 'It's like – well, I wouldn't like to
say. Some beastly hole of the Orcs, I'll warrant, with a hundred years of their filth in
it.'
 'Well,' said Frodo, 'Orcs or no, if it's the only way, we must take it.'
 Drawing a deep breath they passed inside. In a few steps they were in utter and
impenetrable dark. Not since the lightless passages of Moria had Frodo or Sam
known such darkness, and if possible here it was deeper and denser. There, there
were airs moving, and echoes, and a sense of space. Here the air was still, stagnant,
heavy, and sound fell dead. They walked as it were in a black vapour wrought of
veritable darkness itself that, as it was breathed, brought blindness not only to the
eyes but to the mind, so that even the memory of colours and of forms and of any
light faded out of thought. Night always had been, and always would be, and night
was all.
 But for a while they could still feel, and indeed the senses of their feet and fingers
at first seemed sharpened almost painfully. The walls felt, to their surprise, smooth,
and the floor, save for a step now and again, was straight and even, going ever up at
the same stiff slope. The tunnel was high and wide, so wide that, though the hobbits
walked abreast, only touching the side-walls with their outstretched hands, they were
separated, cut off alone in the darkness.
 Gollum had gone in first and seemed to be only a few steps ahead. While they
were still able to give heed to such things, they could hear his breath hissing and
gasping just in front of them. But after a time their senses became duller, both touch
and hearing seemed to grow numb, and they kept on, groping, walking, on and on,
 218
mainly by the force of the will with which they had entered, will to go through and
desire to come at last to the high gate beyond.
 Before they had gone very far, perhaps, but time and distance soon passed out of
his reckoning, Sam on the right, feeling the wall, was aware that there was an
opening at the side: for a moment he caught a faint breath of some air less heavy,
and then they passed it by.
 'There's more than one passage here,' he whispered with an effort: it seemed hard
to make his breath give any sound. 'It's as orc-like a place as ever there could be!'
 After that, first he on the right, and then Frodo on the left, passed three or four
such openings, some wider, some smaller; but there was as yet no doubt of the main
way, for it was straight, and did not turn, and still went steadily up. But how long was
it, how much more of this would they have to endure, or could they endure? The
breathlessness of the air was growing as they climbed; and now they seemed often
in the blind dark to sense some resistance thicker than the foul air. As they thrust
forward they felt things brush against their heads, or against their hands, long
tentacles, or hanging growths perhaps: they could not tell what they were. And still
the stench grew. It grew, until almost it seemed to them that smell was the only clear
sense left to them, and that was for their torment. One hour, two hours, three hours:
how many had they passed in this lightless hole? Hours – days, weeks rather. Sam
left the tunnel-side and shrank towards Frodo, and their hands met and clasped, and
so together they still went on.
 At length Frodo, groping along the left-hand wall, came suddenly to a void. Almost
he fell sideways into the emptiness. Here was some opening in the rock far wider
than any they had yet passed; and out of it came a reek so foul, and a sense of
lurking malice so intense, that Frodo reeled. And at that moment Sam too lurched
and fell forwards.
 Fighting off both the sickness and the fear, Frodo gripped Sam's hand. 'Up!' he
said in a hoarse breath without voice. 'It all comes from here, the stench and the
peril. Now for it! Quick!'
 Calling up his remaining strength and resolution, he dragged Sam to his feet, and
forced his own limbs to move. Sam stumbled beside him. One step, two steps, three
steps-at last six steps. Maybe they had passed the dreadful unseen opening, but
whether that was so or not, suddenly it was easier to move, as if some hostile will for
the moment had released them. They struggled on, still hand in hand.
 But almost at once they came to a new difficulty. The tunnel forked, or so it
seemed, and in the dark they could not tell which was the wider way, or which kept
nearer to the straight. Which should they take, the left, or the right? They knew of
nothing to guide them, yet a false choice would almost certainly be fatal.
 'Which way has Gollum gone?' panted Sam. 'And why didn't he wait?'
 'Smeagol!' said Frodo, trying to call. 'Smeagol!' But his voice croaked, and the
name fell dead almost as it left his lips. There was no answer, not an echo, not even
a tremor of the air.
 'He's really gone this time, I fancy,' muttered Sam. 'I guess this is just exactly
where he meant to bring us. Gollum! If ever I lay hands on you again, you'll be sorry
for it.'
 Presently, groping and fumbling in the dark, they found that the opening on the left
was blocked: either it was a blind, or else some great stone had fallen in the
passage. 'This can't be the way,' Frodo whispered. 'Right or wrong, we must take the
other.'
 'And quick!' Sam panted. 'There's something worse than Gollum about. I can feel
 219
something looking at us.'
 They had not gone more than a few yards when from behind them came a sound,
startling and horrible in the heavy padded silence: a gurgling, bubbling noise, and a
long venomous hiss. They wheeled round, but nothing could be seen. Still as stones
they stood, staring, waiting for they did not know what.
 'It's a trap!' said Sam, and he laid his hand upon the hilt of his sword; and as he did
so, he thought of the darkness of the barrow whence it came. 'I wish old Tom was
near us now!' he thought. Then as he stood, darkness about him and a blackness of
despair and anger in his heart. it seemed to him that he saw a light: a light in his
mind, almost unbearably bright at first, as a sun-ray to the eyes of one long hidden in
a windowless pit. Then the light became colour: green, gold, silver, white. Far off, as
in a little picture drawn by elven-fingers he saw the Lady Galadriel standing on the
grass in Lorien, and gifts were in her hands. And you, Ring-bearer, he heard her say,
remote but clear, for you I have prepared this.
 The bubbling hiss drew nearer, and there was a creaking as of some great jointed
thing that moved with slow purpose in the dark. A reek came on before it. 'Master,
master!' cried Sam, and the life and urgency came back into his voice. 'The Lady's
gift! The star-glass! A light to you in dark places, she said it was to be. The starglass!'
 'The star-glass?' muttered Frodo, as one answering out of sleep, hardly
comprehending. 'Why yes! Why had I forgotten it? A light when all other lights go out!
And now indeed light alone can help us.'
 Slowly his hand went to his bosom, and slowly he held aloft the Phial of Galadriel.
For a moment it glimmered, faint as a rising star struggling in heavy earthward mists,
and then as its power waxed, and hope grew in Frodo's mind, it began to burn, and
kindled to a silver flame, a minute heart of dazzling light, as though Earendil had
himself come down from the high sunset paths with the last Silmaril upon his brow.
The darkness receded from it until it seemed to shine in the centre of a globe of airy
crystal, and the hand that held it sparkled with white fire.
 Frodo gazed in wonder at this marvellous gift that he had so long carried, not
guessing its full worth and potency. Seldom had he remembered it on the road, until
they came to Morgul Vale, and never had he used it for fear of its revealing light.
Aiya Earendil Elenion Ancalima! he cried, and knew not what he had spoken; for it
seemed that another voice spoke through his, clear, untroubled by the foul air of the
pit.
 But other potencies there are in Middle-earth, powers of night, and they are old
and strong. And She that walked in the darkness had heard the Elves cry that cry far
back in the deeps of time, and she had not heeded it, and it did not daunt her now.
Even as Frodo spoke he felt a great malice bent upon him, and a deadly regard
considering him. Not far down the tunnel, between them and the opening where they
had reeled and stumbled, he was aware of eyes growing visible, two great clusters of
many-windowed eyes – the coming menace was unmasked at last. The radiance of
the star-glass was broken and thrown back from their thousand facets, but behind
the glitter a pale deadly fire began steadily to glow within, a flame kindled in some
deep pit of evil thought. Monstrous and abominable eyes they were, bestial and yet
filled with purpose and with hideous delight, gloating over their prey trapped beyond
all hope of escape.
 Frodo and Sam, horror-stricken, began slowly to back away, their own gaze held
by the dreadful stare of those baleful eyes; but as they backed so the eyes
advanced. Frodo's hand wavered, and slowly the Phial drooped. Then suddenly,
 220
released from the holding spell to run a little while in vain panic for the amusement of
the eyes, they both turned and fled together; but even as they ran Frodo looked back
and saw with terror that at once the eyes came leaping up behind. The stench of
death was like a cloud about him.
 'Stand! stand!' he cried desperately. 'Running is no use.'
 Slowly the eyes crept nearer.
 'Galadriel!' he called, and gathering his courage he lifted up the Phial once more.
The eyes halted. For a moment their regard relaxed, as if some hint of doubt
troubled them. Then Frodo's heart flamed within him, and without thinking what he
did, whether it was folly or despair or courage, he took the Phial in his left hand, and
with his right hand drew his sword. Sting flashed out, and the sharp elven-blade
sparkled in the silver light, but at its edges a blue fire flicked. Then holding the star
aloft and the bright sword advanced, Frodo, hobbit of the Shire, walked steadily
down to meet the eyes.
 They wavered. Doubt came into them as the light approached. One by one they
dimmed, and slowly they drew back. No brightness so deadly had ever afflicted them
before. From sun and moon and star they had been safe underground, but now a
star had descended into the very earth. Still it approached, and the eyes began to
quail. One by one they all went dark; they turned away, and a great bulk, beyond the
light's reach, heaved its huge shadow in between. They were gone.
 'Master, master!' cried Sam. He was close behind, his own sword drawn and ready.
'Stars and glory! But the Elves would make a song of that, if ever they heard of it!
And may I live to tell them and hear them sing. But don't go on, master. Don't go
down to that den! Now's our only chance. Now let's get out of this foul hole!'
 And so back they turned once more, first walking and then running; for as they
went the floor of the tunnel rose steeply, and with every stride they climbed higher
above the stenches of the unseen lair, and strength returned to limb and heart. But
still the hatred of the Watcher lurked behind them, blind for a while, perhaps, but
undefeated, still bent on death. And now there came a flow of air to meet them, cold
and thin. The opening, the tunnel's end, at last it was before them. Panting, yearning
for a roofless place, they flung themselves forward, and then in amazement they
staggered, tumbling back. The outlet was blocked with some barrier, but not of
stone: soft and a little yielding it seemed, and yet strong and impervious; air filtered
through, but not a glimmer of any light. Once more they charged and were hurled
back.
 Holding aloft the Phial Frodo looked and before him he saw a greyness which the
radiance of the star-glass did not pierce and did not illuminate, as if it were a shadow
that being cast by no light, no light could dissipate. Across the width and height of
the tunnel a vast web was spun, orderly as the web of some huge spider, but
denser-woven and far greater, and each thread was as thick as rope.
 Sam laughed grimly. 'Cobwebs!' he said. 'Is that all? Cobwebs! But what a spider!
Have at 'em, down with 'em!'
 In a fury he hewed at them with his sword, but the thread that he struck did not
break. It gave a little and then sprang back like a plucked bowstring, turning the
blade and tossing up both sword and arm. Three times Sam struck with all his force,
and at last one single cord of all the countless cords snapped and twisted, curling
and whipping through the air. One end of it lashed Sam's hand, and he cried out in
pain, starting back and drawing his hand across his mouth.
 'It will take days to clear the road like this,' he said. 'What's to be done? Have those
eyes come back?'
 221
 'No, not to be seen,' said Frodo. 'But I still feel that they are looking at me, or
thinking about me: making some other plan, perhaps. If this light were lowered, or if it
failed, they would quickly come again.'
 'Trapped in the end!' said Sam bitterly, his anger rising again above weariness and
despair. 'Gnats in a net. May the curse of Faramir bite that Gollum and bite him
quick!'
 'That would not help us now,' said Frodo. 'Come! Let us see what Sting can do. It is
an elven-blade. There were webs of horror in the dark ravines of Beleriand where it
was forged. But you must be the guard and hold back the eyes. Here, take the starglass. Do not be afraid.
Hold it up and watch!'
 Then Frodo stepped up to the great grey net, and hewed it with a wide sweeping
stroke, drawing the bitter edge swiftly across a ladder of close-strung cords, and at
once springing away. The blue-gleaming blade shore through them like a scythe
through grass, and they leaped and writhed and then hung loose. A great rent was
made.
 Stroke after stroke he dealt, until at last all the web within his reach was shattered,
and the upper portion blew and swayed like a loose veil in the incoming wind. The
trap was broken.
 'Come!' cried Frodo. 'On! On!' Wild joy at their escape from the very mouth of
despair suddenly filled all his mind. His head whirled as with a draught of potent
wine. He sprang out, shouting as he came.
 It seemed light in that dark land to his eyes that had passed through the den of
night. The great smokes had risen and grown thinner, and the last hours of a sombre
day were passing; the red glare of Mordor had died away in sullen gloom. Yet it
seemed to Frodo that he looked upon a morning of sudden hope. Almost he had
reached the summit of the wall. Only a little higher now. The Cleft, Cirith Ungol, was
before him, a dim notch in the black ridge, and the horns of rock darkling in the sky
on either side. A short race, a sprinter's course and he would be through!
 'The pass, Sam!' he cried, not heeding the shrillness of his voice, that released
from the choking airs of the tunnel rang out now high and wild. 'The pass! Run, run,
and we'll be through – through before any one can stop us!'
 Sam came up behind as fast as he could urge his legs; but glad as he was to be
free, he was uneasy, and as he ran, he kept on glancing back at the dark arch of the
tunnel, fearing to see eyes, or some shape beyond his imagining, spring out in
pursuit. Too little did he or his master know of the craft of Shelob. She had many
exits from her lair.
 There agelong she had dwelt, an evil thing in spider-form, even such as once of
old had lived in the Land of the Elves in the West that is now under the Sea, such as
Beren fought in the Mountains of Terror in Doriath, and so came to Luthien upon the
green sward amid the hemlocks in the moonlight long ago. How Shelob came there,
flying from ruin, no tale tells, for out of the Dark Years few tales have come. But still
she was there, who was there before Sauron, and before the first stone of Barad-dur;
and she served none but herself, drinking the blood of Elves and Men, bloated and
grown fat with endless brooding on her feasts, weaving webs of shadow; for all living
things were her food, and her vomit darkness. Far and wide her lesser broods,
bastards of the miserable mates, her own offspring, that she slew, spread from glen
to glen, from the Ephel Duath to the eastern hills, to Dol Guldur and the fastnesses
of Mirkwood. But none could rival her, Shelob the Great, last child of Ungoliant to
trouble the unhappy world.
 Already, years before, Gollum had beheld her, Smeagol who pried into all dark
 222
holes, and in past days he had bowed and worshipped her, and the darkness of her
evil will walked through all the ways of his weariness beside him, cutting him off from
light and from regret. And he had promised to bring her food. But her lust was not his
lust. Little she knew of or cared for towers, or rings, or anything devised by mind or
hand, who only desired death for all others, mind and body, and for herself a glut of
life, alone, swollen till the mountains could no longer hold her up and the darkness
could not contain her.
 But that desire was yet far away, and long now had she been hungry, lurking in her
den, while the power of Sauron grew, and light and living things forsook his borders;
and the city in the valley was dead, and no Elf or Man came near, only the unhappy
Orcs. Poor food and wary. But she must eat, and however busily they delved new
winding passages from the pass and from their tower, ever she found some way to
snare them. But she lusted for sweeter meat. And Gollum had brought it to her.
 'We'll see, we'll see,' he said often to himself, when the evil mood was on him, as
he walked the dangerous road from Emyn Muil to Morgul Vale, 'we'll see. It may well
be, O yes, it may well be that when She throws away the bones and the empty
garments, we shall find it, we shall get it, the Precious, a reward for poor Smeagol
who brings nice food. And we'll save the Precious, as we promised. O yes. And
when we've got it safe, then She'll know it, O yes, then we'll pay Her back, my
precious. Then we'll pay everyone back!'
 So he thought in an inner chamber of his cunning, which he still hoped to hide from
her, even when he had come to her again and had bowed low before her while his
companions slept.
 And as for Sauron: he knew where she lurked. It pleased him that she should dwell
there hungry but unabated in malice, a more sure watch upon that ancient path into
his land than any other that his skill could have devised. And Orcs, they were useful
slaves, but he had them in plenty. If now and again Shelob caught them to stay her
appetite, she was welcome: he could spare them. And sometimes as a man may
cast a dainty to his cat (his cat he calls her, but she owns him not) Sauron would
send her prisoners that he had no better uses for: he would have them driven to her
hole, and report brought back to him of the play she made.
 So they both lived, delighting in their own devices, and feared no assault, nor
wrath, nor any end of their wickedness. Never yet had any fly escaped from Shelob's
webs, and the greater now was her rage and hunger.
 But nothing of this evil which they had stirred up against them did poor Sam know,
except that a fear was growing on him, a menace which he could not see; and such
a weight did it become that it was a burden to him to run, and his feet seemed
leaden.
 Dread was round him, and enemies before him in the pass, and his master was in
a fey mood running heedlessly to meet them. Turning his eyes away from the
shadow behind and the deep gloom beneath the cliff upon his left, he looked ahead,
and he saw two things that increased his dismay. He saw that the sword which
Frodo still held unsheathed was glittering with blue flame; and he saw that though
the sky behind was now dark, still the window in the tower was glowing red.
 'Orcs!' he muttered. 'We'll never rush it like this. There's Orcs about, and worse
than Orcs.' Then returning quickly to his long habit of secrecy, he closed his hand
about the precious Phial which he still bore. Red with his own living blood his hand
shone for a moment, and then he thrust the revealing light deep into a pocket near
his breast and drew his elven-cloak about him. Now he tried to quicken his pace. His
master was gaining on him; already he was some twenty strides ahead, flitting on
 223
like a shadow; soon he would be lost to sight in that grey world.
 Hardly had Sam hidden the light of the star-glass when she came. A little way
ahead and to his left he saw suddenly, issuing from a black hole of shadow under
the cliff, the most loathly shape that he had ever beheld, horrible beyond the horror
of an evil dream. Most like a spider she was, but huger than the great hunting
beasts, and more terrible than they because of the evil purpose in her remorseless
eyes. Those same eyes that he had thought daunted and defeated, there they were
lit with a fell light again, clustering in her out-thrust head. Great horns she had, and
behind her short stalk-like neck was her huge swollen body, a vast bloated bag,
swaying and sagging between her legs; its great bulk was black, blotched with livid
marks, but the belly underneath was pale and luminous and gave forth a stench. Her
legs were bent, with great knobbed joints high above her back, and hairs that stuck
out like steel spines, and at each leg's end there was a claw.
 As soon as she had squeezed her soft squelching body and its folded limbs out of
the upper exit from her lair, she moved with a horrible speed, now running on her
creaking legs, now making a sudden bound. She was between Sam and his master.
Either she did not see Sam, or she avoided him for the moment as the bearer of the
light, and fixed all her intent upon one prey, upon Frodo, bereft of his Phial, running
heedless up the path, unaware yet of his peril. Swiftly he ran, but Shelob was swifter;
in a few leaps she would have him.
 Sam gasped and gathered all his remaining breath to shout. 'Look out behind!' he
yelled. 'Look out master! I'm' – but suddenly his cry was stifled.
 A long clammy hand went over his mouth and another caught him by the neck,
while something wrapped itself about his leg. Taken off his guard he toppled
backwards into the arms of his attacker.
 'Got him!' hissed Gollum in his ear. 'At last, my precious, we've got him, yes, the
nassty hobbit. We takes this one. She'll get the other. O yes, Shelob will get him, not
Smeagol: he promised; he won't hurt Master at all. But he's got you, you nassty filthy
little sneak!' He spat on Sam's neck.
 Fury at the treachery, and desperation at the delay when his master was in deadly
peril, gave to Sam a sudden violence and strength that was far beyond anything that
Gollum had expected from this slow stupid hobbit, as he thought him. Not Gollum
himself could have twisted more quickly or more fiercely. His hold on Sam's mouth
 224
slipped, and Sam ducked and lunged forward again, trying to tear away from the grip
on his neck. His sword was still in his hand, and on his left arm, hanging by its thong,
was Faramir's staff. Desperately he tried to turn and stab his enemy. But Gollum was
too quick. His long right arm shot out, and he grabbed Sam's wrist: his fingers were
like a vice; slowly and relentlessly he bent the hand down and forward, till with a cry
of pain Sam released the sword and it fell to the ground; and all the while Gollum's
other hand was tightening on Sam's throat.
 Then Sam played his last trick. With all his strength he pulled away and got his feet
firmly planted; then suddenly he drove his legs against the ground and with his whole
force hurled himself backwards.
 Not expecting even this simple trick from Sam, Gollum fell over with Sam on top,
and he received the weight of the sturdy hobbit in his stomach. A sharp hiss came
out of him, and for a second his hand upon Sam's throat loosened; but his fingers
still gripped the sword-hand. Sam tore himself forward and away, and stood up, and
then quickly he wheeled away to his right, pivoted on the wrist held by Gollum.
Laying hold of the staff with his left hand, Sam swung it up, and down it came with a
whistling crack on Gollum's outstretched arm, just below the elbow.
 With a squeal Gollum let go. Then Sam waded in; not waiting to change the staff
from left to right he dealt another savage blow. Quick as a snake Gollum slithered
aside, and the stroke aimed at his head fell across his back. The staff cracked and
broke. That was enough for him. Grabbing from behind was an old game of his, and
seldom had he failed in it. But this time, misled by spite, he had made the mistake of
speaking and gloating before he had both hands on his victim's neck. Everything had
gone wrong with his beautiful plan, since that horrible light had so unexpectedly
appeared in the darkness. And now he was face to face with a furious enemy, little
less than his own size. This fight was not for him. Sam swept up his sword from the
ground and raised it. Gollum squealed, and springing aside on to all fours, he
jumped away in one big bound like a frog. Before Sam could reach him, he was off,
running with amazing speed back towards the tunnel.
 Sword in hand Sam went after him. For the moment he had forgotten everything
else but the red fury in his brain and the desire to kill Gollum. But before he could
overtake him, Gollum was gone. Then as the dark hole stood before him and the
stench came out to meet him, like a clap of thunder the thought of Frodo and the
monster smote upon Sam's mind. He spun round, and rushed wildly up the path,
calling and calling his master's name. He was too late. So far Gollum's plot had
succeeded.
Chapter 10
The Choices of Master Samwise
 Frodo was lying face upward on the ground and the monster was bending over
him, so intent upon her victim that she took no heed of Sam and his cries, until he
was close at hand. As he rushed up he saw that Frodo was already bound in cords,
wound about him from ankle to shoulder, and the monster with her great forelegs
was beginning half to lift, half to drag his body away.
 On the near side of him lay, gleaming on the ground, his elven-blade, where it had
fallen useless from his grasp. Sam did not wait to wonder what was to be done, or
whether he was brave, or loyal, or filled with rage. He sprang forward with a yell, and
seized his master's sword in his left hand. Then he charged. No onslaught more
fierce was ever seen in the savage world of beasts; where some desperate small
 225
creature armed with little teeth alone, will spring upon a tower of horn and hide that
stands above its fallen mate.
 Disturbed as if out of some gloating dream by his small yell she turned slowly the
dreadful malice of her glance upon him. But almost before she was aware that a fury
was upon her greater than any she had known in countless years, the shining sword
bit upon her foot and shore away the claw. Sam sprang in, inside the arches of her
legs, and with a quick upthrust of his other hand stabbed at the clustered eyes upon
her lowered head. One great eye went dark.
 Now the miserable creature was right under her, for the moment out of the reach of
her sting and of her claws. Her vast belly was above him with its putrid light, and the
stench of it almost smote him down. Still his fury held for one more blow, and before
she could sink upon him, smothering him and all his little impudence of courage, he
slashed the bright elven-blade across her with desperate strength.
 But Shelob was not as dragons are, no softer spot had she save only her eyes.
Knobbed and pitted with corruption was her age-old hide, but ever thickened from
within with layer on layer of evil growth. The blade scored it with a dreadful gash, but
those hideous folds could not be pierced by any strength of men, not though Elf or
Dwarf should forge the steel or the hand of Beren or of Turin wield it. She yielded to
the stroke, and then heaved up the great bag of her belly high above Sam's head.
Poison frothed and bubbled from the wound. Now splaying her legs she drove her
huge bulk down on him again. Too soon. For Sam still stood upon his feet, and
dropping his own sword, with both hands he held the elven-blade point upwards,
fending off that ghastly roof; and so Shelob, with the driving force of her own cruel
will, with strength greater than any warrior's hand, thrust herself upon a bitter spike.
Deep, deep it pricked, as Sam was crushed slowly to the ground.
 No such anguish had Shelob ever known, or dreamed of knowing, in all her long
world of wickedness. Not the doughtiest soldier of old Gondor, nor the most savage
Orc entrapped, had ever thus endured her, or set blade to her beloved flesh. A
shudder went through her. Heaving up again, wrenching away from the pain, she
bent her writhing limbs beneath her and sprang backwards in a convulsive leap.
 Sam had fallen to his knees by Frodo's head, his senses reeling in the foul stench,
his two hands still gripping the hilt of the sword. Through the mist before his eyes he
was aware dimly of Frodo's face and stubbornly he fought to master himself and to
drag himself out of the swoon that was upon him. Slowly he raised his head and saw
her, only a few paces away, eyeing him, her beak drabbling a spittle of venom, and a
green ooze trickling from below her wounded eye. There she crouched, her
shuddering belly splayed upon the ground, the great bows of her legs quivering, as
she gathered herself for another spring – this time to crush and sting to death: no
little bite of poison to still the struggling of her meat; this time to slay and then to
rend.
 Even as Sam himself crouched, looking at her, seeing his death in her eyes, a
thought came to him, as if some remote voice had spoken, and he fumbled in his
breast with his left hand, and found what he sought: cold and hard and solid it
seemed to his touch in a phantom world of horror, the Phial of Galadriel.
 'Galadriel!' he said faintly, and then he heard voices far off but clear: the crying of
the Elves as they walked under the stars in the beloved shadows of the Shire, and
the music of the Elves as it came through his sleep in the Hall of Fire in the house of
Elrond.
 226
Gilthoniel A Elbereth!
 And then his tongue was loosed and his voice cried in a language which he did not
know:
A Elbereth Gilthoniel
o menel palan-diriel,
le nallon si di'nguruthos!
A tiro nin, Fanuilos!
 And with that he staggered to his feet and was Samwise the hobbit, Hamfast's son,
again.
 'Now come, you filth!' he cried. 'You've hurt my master, you brute, and you'll pay for
it. We're going on; but we'll settle with you first. Come on, and taste it again!'
 As if his indomitable spirit had set its potency in motion, the glass blazed suddenly
like a white torch in his hand. It flamed like a star that leaping from the firmament
sears the dark air with intolerable light. No such terror out of heaven had ever burned
in Shelob's face before. The beams of it entered into her wounded head and scored
it with unbearable pain, and the dreadful infection of light spread from eye to eye.
She fell back beating the air with her forelegs, her sight blasted by inner lightnings,
her mind in agony. Then turning her maimed head away, she rolled aside and began
to crawl, claw by claw, towards the opening in the dark cliff behind.
 Sam came on. He was reeling like a drunken man, but he came on. And Shelob
cowed at last, shrunken in defeat, jerked and quivered as she tried to hasten from
him. She reached the hole, and squeezing down, leaving a trail of green-yellow
slime, she slipped in, even as Sam hewed a last stroke at her dragging legs. Then
he fell to the ground.
 Shelob was gone; and whether she lay long in her lair, nursing her malice and her
misery, and in slow years of darkness healed herself from within, rebuilding her
clustered eyes, until with hunger like death she spun once more her dreadful snares
in the glens of the Mountains of Shadow, this tale does not tell.
 Sam was left alone. Wearily, as the evening of the Nameless Land fell upon the
place of battle, he crawled back to his master.
 'Master, dear master,' he said, but Frodo did not speak. As he had run forward,
eager, rejoicing to be free, Shelob with hideous speed had come behind and with
one swift stroke had stung him in the neck. He lay now pale, and heard no voice, and
did not move.
 'Master, dear master!' said Sam, and through a long silence waited, listening in
vain.
 Then as quickly as he could he cut away the binding cords and laid his head upon
Frodo's breast and to his mouth, but no stir of life could he find, nor feel the faintest
flutter of the heart. Often he chafed his master's hands and feet, and touched his
brow, but all were cold.
 'Frodo, Mr. Frodo!' he called. 'Don't leave me here alone! It's your Sam calling.
Don't go where I can't follow! Wake up, Mr. Frodo! O wake up, Frodo, me dear, me
dear. Wake up!'
 Then anger surged over hint, and he ran about his master's body in a rage,
stabbing the air, and smiting the stones, and shouting challenges. Presently he came
back, and bending looked at Frodo's face, pale beneath him in the dusk. And
 227
suddenly he saw that he was in the picture that was revealed to him in the mirror of
Galadriel in Lorien: Frodo with a pale face lying fast asleep under a great dark cliff.
Or fast asleep he had thought then. 'He's dead!' he said. 'Not asleep, dead!' And as
he said it, as if the words had set the venom to its work again, it seemed to him that
the hue of the face grew livid green.
 And then black despair came down on him, and Sam bowed to the ground, and
drew his grey hood over his head, and night came into his heart, and he knew no
more.
 When at last the blackness passed, Sam looked up and shadows were about him;
but for how many minutes or hours the world had gone dragging on he could not tell.
He was still in the same place, and still his master lay beside him dead. The
mountains had not crumbled nor the earth fallen into ruin.
 'What shall I do, what shall I do?' he said. 'Did I come all this way with him for
nothing?' And then he remembered his own voice speaking words that at the time he
did not understand himself, at the beginning of their journey: I have something to do
before the end. I must see it through, sir, if you understand.
 'But what can I do? Not leave Mr. Frodo dead, unburied on the top of the
mountains, and go home? Or go on? Go on?' he repeated, and for a moment doubt
and fear shook him. 'Go on? Is that what I've got to do? And leave him?'
 Then at last he began to weep; and going to Frodo he composed his body, and
folded his cold hands upon his breast, and wrapped his cloak about him; and he laid
his own sword at one side, and the staff that Faramir had given at the other.
 'If I'm to go on,' he said, 'then I must take your sword, by your leave, Mr. Frodo, but
I'll put this one to lie by you, as it lay by the old king in the barrow; and you've got
your beautiful mithril coat from old Mr. Bilbo. And your star-glass, Mr. Frodo, you did
lend it to me and I'll need it, for I'll be always in the dark now. It's too good for me,
and the Lady gave it to you, but maybe she'd understand. Do you understand, Mr.
Frodo? I've got to go on.'
 But he could not go, not yet. He knelt and held Frodo's hand and could not release
it. And time went by and still he knelt, holding his master's hand, and in his heart
keeping a debate.
 Now he tried to find strength to tear himself away and go on a lonely journey – for
vengeance. If once he could go, his anger would bear him down all the roads of the
world, pursuing, until he had him at last: Gollum. Then Gollum would die in a corner.
But that was not what he had set out to do. It would not be worth while to leave his
master for that. It would not bring him back. Nothing would. They had better both be
dead together. And that too would be a lonely journey.
 He looked on the bright point of the sword. He thought of the places behind where
there was a black brink and an empty fall into nothingness. There was no escape
that way. That was to do nothing, not even to grieve. That was not what he had set
out to do. 'What am I to do then?' he cried again, and now he seemed plainly to
know the hard answer: see it through. Another lonely journey, and the worst.
 'What? Me, alone, go to the Crack of Doom and all?' He quailed still, but the
resolve grew. 'What? Me take the Ring from him? The Council gave it to him.'
 But the answer came at once: 'And the Council gave him companions, so that the
errand should not fail. And you are the last of all the Company. The errand must not
fail.'
 'I wish I wasn't the last,' he groaned. 'I wish old Gandalf was here or somebody.
Why am I left all alone to make up my mind? I'm sure to go wrong. And it's not for me
to go taking the Ring, putting myself forward.'
 228
 'But you haven't put yourself forward; you've been put forward. And as for not
being the right and proper person, why, Mr. Frodo wasn't as you might say, nor Mr.
Bilbo. They didn't choose themselves.'
 'Ah well, I must make up my own mind. I will make it up. But I'll be sure to go
wrong: that'd be Sam Gamgee all over.
 'Let me see now: if we're found here, or Mr. Frodo's found, and that Thing's on him,
well, the Enemy will get it. And that's the end of all of us, of Lorien, and Rivendell,
and the Shire and all. And there is no time to lose, or it'll be the end anyway. The
war's begun, and more than likely things are all going the Enemy's way already. No
chance to go back with It and get advice or permission. No, it's sit here till they come
and kill me over master's body, and gets It: or take It and go.' He drew a deep
breath. 'Then take It, it is!'
 He stooped. Very gently he undid the clasp at the neck and slipped his hand inside
Frodo's tunic; then with his other hand raising the head, he kissed the cold forehead,
and softly drew the chain over it. And then the head lay quietly back again in rest. No
change came over the still face, and by that more than by all other tokens Sam was
convinced at last that Frodo had died and laid aside the Quest.
 'Good-bye, master, my dear!' he murmured. 'Forgive your Sam. He'll come back to
this spot when the job's done – if he manages it. And then he'll not leave you again.
Rest you quiet till I come; and may no foul creature come anigh you! And if the Lady
could hear me and give me one wish, I would wish to come back and find you again.
Good-bye!'
 And then he bent his own neck and put the chain upon it, and at once his head
was bowed to the ground with the weight of the Ring, as if a great stone had been
strung on him. But slowly, as if the weight became less, or new strength grew in him,
he raised his head, and then with a great effort got to his feet and found that he
could walk and bear his burden. And for a moment he lifted up the Phial and looked
down at his master, and the light burned gently now with the soft radiance of the
evening-star in summer, and in that light Frodo's face was fair of hue again, pale but
beautiful with an elvish beauty, as of one who has long passed the shadows. And
with the bitter comfort of that last sight Sam turned and hid the light and stumbled on
into the growing dark.
 He had not far to go. The tunnel was some way behind; the Cleft a couple of
hundred yards ahead, or less. The path was visible in the dusk' a deep rut worn in
ages of passage, running now gently up in a long trough with cliffs on either side.
The trough narrowed rapidly. Soon Sam came to a long flight of broad shallow steps.
Now the orc-tower was right above him, frowning black, and in it the red eye glowed.
Now he was hidden in the dark shadow under it. He was coming to the top of the
steps and was in the Cleft at last.
 'I've made up my mind,' he kept saying to himself. But he had not. Though he had
done his best to think it out, what he was doing was altogether against the grain of
his nature. 'Have I got it wrong?' he muttered. 'What ought I to have done?'
 As the sheer sides of the Cleft closed about him, before he reached the actual
summit, before he looked at last on the path descending into the Nameless Land, he
turned. For a moment, motionless in intolerable doubt, he looked back. He could still
see, like a small blot in the gathering gloom, the mouth of the tunnel; and he thought
he could see or guess where Frodo lay. He fancied there was a glimmer on the
ground down there, or perhaps it was some trick of his tears, as he peered out at
that high stony place where all his life had fallen in ruin.
 'If only I could have my wish, my one wish,' he sighed, 'to go back and find him!'
 229
Then at last he turned to the road in front and took a few steps: the heaviest and the
most reluctant he had ever taken.
 Only a few steps; and now only a few more and he would be going down and
would never see that high place again. And then suddenly he heard cries and voices.
He stood still as stone. Orc-voices. They were behind him and before him. A noise of
tramping feet and harsh shouts: Orcs were coming up to the Cleft from the far side,
from some entry to the tower, perhaps. Tramping feet and shouts behind. He
wheeled round. He saw small red lights, torches, winking away below there as they
issued from the tunnel. At last the hunt was up. The red eye of the tower had not
been blind. He was caught.
 Now the flicker of approaching torches and the clink of steel ahead was very near.
In a minute they would reach the top and be on him. He had taken too long in
making up his mind, and now it was no good. How could he escape, or save himself,
or save the Ring? The Ring. He was not aware of any thought or decision. He simply
found himself drawing out the chain and taking the Ring in his hand. The head of the
orc-company appeared in the Cleft right before him. Then he put it on.
 The world changed, and a single moment of time was filled with an hour of thought.
At once he was aware that hearing was sharpened while sight was dimmed, but
otherwise than in Shelob's lair. All things about him now were not dark but vague;
while he himself was there in a grey hazy world, alone, like a small black solid rock
and the Ring, weighing down his left hand, was like an orb of hot gold. He did not
feel invisible at all, but horribly and uniquely visible; and he knew that somewhere an
Eye was searching for him.
 He heard the crack of stone, and the murmur of water far off in Morgul Vale; and
down away under the rock the bubbling misery of Shelob, groping, lost in some blind
passage; and voices in the dungeons of the tower; and the cries of the Orcs as they
came out of the tunnel; and deafening, roaring in his ears, the crash of the feet and
the rending clamour of the Orcs before him. He shrank against the cliff. But they
marched up like a phantom company, grey distorted figures in a mist, only dreams of
fear with pale flames in their hands. And they passed him by. He cowered, trying to
creep away into some cranny and to hide.
 He listened. The Orcs from the tunnel and the others marching down had sighted
one another, and both parties were now hurrying and shouting. He heard them both
clearly, and he understood what they said. Perhaps the Ring gave understanding of
tongues, or simply understanding, especially of the servants of Sauron its maker, so
that if he gave heed, he understood and translated the thought to himself. Certainly
the Ring had grown greatly in power as it approached the places of its forging; but
one thing it did not confer, and that was courage. At present Sam still thought only of
hiding, of lying low till all was quiet again; and he listened anxiously. He could not tell
how near the voices were, the words seemed almost in his ears.
 'Hola! Gorbag! What are you doing up here? Had enough of war already?'
 'Orders, you lubber. And what are you doing, Shagrat? Tired of lurking up there?
Thinking of coming down to fight?'
 'Orders to you. I'm in command of this pass. So speak civil. What's your report?'
 'Nothing.'
 'Hai! hai! yoi!' A yell broke into the exchanges of the leaders. The Orcs lower down
had suddenly seen something. They began to run. So did the others.
 'Hai! Hola! Here's something! Lying right in the road. A spy, a spy!' There was a
hoot of snarling horns and a babel of baying voices.
 With a dreadful stroke Sam was wakened from his cowering mood. They had seen
 230
his master. What would they do? He had heard tales of the Orcs to make the blood
run cold. It could not be borne. He sprang up. He flung the Quest and all his
decisions away, and fear and doubt with them. He knew now where his place was
and had been: at his master's side, though what he could do there was not clear.
Back he ran down the steps, down the path towards Frodo.
 'How many are there?' he thought. 'Thirty or forty from the tower at least, and a lot
more than that from down below, I guess. How many can I kill before they get me?
They'll see the flame of the sword, as soon as I draw it, and they'll get me sooner or
later. I wonder if any song will ever mention it: how Samwise fell in the High Pass
and made a wall of bodies round his master. No, no song. Of course not, for the
Ring'll be found, and there'll be no more songs. I can't help it. My place is by Mr.
Frodo. They must understand that – Elrond and the Council, and the great Lords and
Ladies with all their wisdom. Their plans have gone wrong. I can't be their Ringbearer. Not without Mr.
Frodo.'
 But the Orcs were out of his dim sight now. He had had no time to consider
himself, but now he realized that he was weary, weary almost to exhaustion: his legs
would not carry him as he wished. He was too slow. The path seemed miles long.
Where had they all got to in the mist?
 There they were again! A good way ahead still. A cluster of figures round
something lying on the ground; a few seemed to be darting this way and that, bent
like dogs on a trail. He tried to make a spurt.
 'Come on, Sam!' he said, 'or you'll be too late again.' He loosened the sword in its
sheath. In a minute he would draw it, and then–
 There was a wild clamour, hooting and laughing, as something was lifted from the
ground. 'Ya hoi! Ya harri hoi! Up! Up!'
 Then a voice shouted: 'Now off! The quick way. Back to the Undergate! She'll not
trouble us tonight by all the signs.' The whole band of orc-figures began to move.
Four in the middle were carrying a body high on their shoulders. 'Ya hoi!'
 They had taken Frodo's body. They were off. He could not catch them up. Still he
laboured on. The Orcs reached the tunnel and were passing in. Those with the
burden went first, and behind them there was a good deal of struggling and jostling.
Sam came on. He drew the sword, a flicker of blue in his wavering hand, but they did
not see it. Even as he came panting up, the last of them vanished into the black hole.
 For a moment he stood, gasping, clutching his breast. Then he drew his sleeve
across his face, wiping away the grime, and sweat, and tears. 'Curse the filth!' he
said, and sprang after them into the darkness.
 It no longer seemed very dark to him in the tunnel, rather it was as if he had
stepped out of a thin mist into a heavier fog. His weariness was growing but his will
hardened all the more. He thought he could see the light of torches a little way
ahead, but try as he would, he could not catch them up. Orcs go fast in tunnels, and
this tunnel they knew well; for in spite of Shelob they were forced to use it often as
the swiftest way from the Dead City over the mountains. In what far-off time the main
tunnel and the great round pit had been made, where Shelob had taken up her
abode in ages past, they did not know; but many byways they had themselves
delved about in on either side, so as to escape the lair in their goings to and fro on
the business of their masters. Tonight they did not intend to go far down, but were
hastening to find a side-passage that led back to their watch-tower on the cliff. Must
of them were gleeful, delighted with what they had found and seen, and as they ran
they gabbled and yammered after the fashion of their kind. Sam heard the noise of
their harsh voices, flat and hard in the dead air, and he could distinguish two voices
 231
from among all the rest: they were louder, and nearer to him. The captains of the two
parties seemed to be bringing up the rear, debating as they went.
 'Can't you stop your rabble making such a racket, Shagrat?' grunted the one. 'We
don't want Shelob on us.'
 'Go on, Gorbag! Yours are making more than half the noise,' said the other. 'But let
the lads play! No need to worry about Shelob for a bit, I reckon. She's sat on a nail, it
seems, and we shan't cry about that. Didn't you see: a nasty mess all the way back
to that cursed crack of hers? If we've stopped it once, we've stopped it a hundred
times. So let 'em laugh. And we've struck a bit of luck at last: got something that
Lugburz wants.'
 'Lugburz wants it, eh? What is it, d'you think? Elvish it looked to me, but
undersized. What's the danger in a thing like that?'
 'Don't know till we've had a look.'
 'Oho! So they haven't told you what to expect? They don't tell us all they know, do
they? Not by half. But they can make mistakes, even the Top Ones can.'
 'Sh, Gorbag!' Shagrat's voice was lowered, so that even with his strangely
sharpened hearing Sam could only just catch what was said. 'They may, but they've
got eyes and ears everywhere; some among my lot, as like as not. But there's no
doubt about it, they're troubled about something. The Nazgul down below are, by
your account; and Lugburz is too. Something nearly slipped.'
 'Nearly, you say!' said Gorbag.
 'All right,' said Shagrat, 'but we'll talk of that later: Wait till we get to the Under-way.
There's a place there where we can talk a bit, while the lads go on.'
 Shortly afterwards Sam saw the torches disappear. Then there was a rumbling
noise, and just as he hurried up, a bump. As far as he could guess the Orcs had
turned and gone into the very opening which Frodo and he had tried and found
blocked. It was still blocked.
 There seemed to be a great stone in the way, but the Orcs had got through
somehow, for he could hear their voices on the other side. They were still running
along, deeper and deeper into the mountain, back towards the tower. Sam felt
desperate. They were carrying off his master's body for some foul purpose and he
could not follow. He thrust and pushed at the block, and he threw himself against it,
but it did not yield. Then not far inside, or so he thought, he heard the two captains'
 232
voices talking again. He stood still listening for a little hoping perhaps to learn
something useful. Perhaps Gorbag, who seemed to belong to Minas Morgul, would
come out, and he could then slip in.
 'No, I don't know,' said Gorbag's voice. 'The messages go through quicker than
anything could fly, as a rule. But I don't enquire how it's done. Safest not to. Grr!
Those Nazgul give me the creeps. And they skin the body off you as soon as look at
you, and leave you all cold in the dark on the other side. But He likes 'em; they're His
favourites nowadays, so it's no use grumbling. I tell you, it's no game serving down in
the city.'
 'You should try being up here with Shelob for company,' said Shagrat.
 'I'd like to try somewhere where there's none of 'em. But the war's on now, and
when that's over things may be easier.'
 'It's going well, they say.'
 'They would,' grunted Gorbag. 'We'll see. But anyway, if it does go well, there
should be a lot more room. What d'you say? – if we get a chance, you and me'll slip
off and set up somewhere on our own with a few trusty lads, somewhere where
there's good loot nice and handy, and no big bosses.'
 'Ah!' said Shagrat. 'Like old times.'
 'Yes,' said Gorbag. 'But don't count on it. I'm not easy in my mind. As I said, the Big
Bosses, ay,' his voice sank almost to a whisper, 'ay, even the Biggest, can make
mistakes. Something nearly slipped you say. I say, something has slipped. And
we've got to look out. Always the poor Uruks to put slips right, and small thanks. But
don't forget: the enemies don't love us any more than they love Him, and if they get
topsides on Him, we're done too. But see here: when were you ordered out?'
 'About an hour ago, just before you saw us. A message came: Nazgul uneasy.
Spies feared on Stairs. Double vigilance. Patrol to head of Stairs. I came at once.'
 'Bad business,' said Gorbag. 'See here – our Silent Watchers were uneasy more
than two days ago, that I know. But my patrol wasn't ordered out for another day, nor
any message sent to Lugburz either: owing to the Great Signal going up, and the
High Nazgul going off to the war, and all that. And then they couldn't get Lugburz to
pay attention for a good while, I'm told.'
 'The Eye was busy elsewhere, I suppose,' said Shagrat. 'Big things going on away
west, they say.'
 'I daresay,' growled Gorbag. 'But in the meantime enemies have got up the Stairs.
And what were you up to? You're supposed to keep watch, aren't you, special orders
or no? What are you for?'
 'That's enough! Don't try and teach me my job. We were awake all right. We knew
there were funny things going on.'
 'Very funny!'
 'Yes, very funny: lights and shouting and all. But Shelob was on the go. My lads
saw her and her Sneak.'
 'Her Sneak? What's that?'
 'You must have seen him: little thin black fellow; like a spider himself, or perhaps
more like a starved frog. He's been here before. Came out of Lugburz the first time,
years ago, and we had word from High Up to let him pass. He's been up the Stairs
once or twice since then, but we've left him alone: seems to have some
understanding with Her Ladyship. I suppose he's no good to eat: she wouldn't worry
about words from High Up. But a fine guard you keep in the valley: he was up here a
day before all this racket. Early last night we saw him. Anyway my lads reported that
Her Ladyship was having some fun, and that seemed good enough for me, until the
 233
message came. I thought her Sneak had brought her a toy, or that you'd perhaps
sent her a present, a prisoner of war or something. I don't interfere when she's
playing. Nothing gets by Shelob when she's on the hunt.'
 'Nothing, say you! Didn't you use your eyes back there? I tell you I'm not easy in
my mind. Whatever came up the Stairs, did get by. It cut her web and got clean out
of the hole. That's something to think about!'
 'Ah well, but she got him in the end, didn't she?'
 'Got him? Got who? This little fellow? But if he was the only one then she'd have
had him off to her larder long before, and there he'd be now. And if Lugburz wanted
him, you'd have to go and get him. Nice for you. But there was more than one.'
 At this point Sam began to listen more attentively and pressed his ear against the
stone.
 'Who cut the cords she'd put round him, Shagrat? Same one as cut the web. Didn't
you see that? And who stuck a pin into Her Ladyship? Same one, I reckon. And
where is he? Where is he, Shagrat?'
 Shagrat made no reply.
 'You may well put your thinking cap on, if you've got one. It's no laughing matter.
No one, no one has ever stuck a pin in Shelob before, as you should know well
enough. There's no grief in that; but think – there's someone loose hereabouts as is
more dangerous than any other damned rebel that ever walked since the bad old
times, since the Great Siege. Something has slipped.'
 'And what is it then?' growled Shagrat.
 'By all the signs, Captain Shagrat, I'd say there's a large warrior loose, Elf most
likely, with an elf-sword anyway, and an axe as well maybe: and he's loose in your
bounds, too, and you've never spotted him. Very funny indeed!' Gorbag spat. Sam
smiled grimly at this description of himself.
 'Ah well, you always did take a gloomy view,' said Shagrat. 'You can read the signs
how you like, but there may be other ways to explain them. Anyhow. I've got
watchers at every point, and I'm going to deal with one thing at a time. When I've had
a look at the fellow we have caught, then I'll begin to worry about something else.'
 'It's my guess you won't find much in that little fellow,' said Gorbag. 'He may have
had nothing to do with the real mischief. The big fellow with the sharp sword doesn't
seem to have thought him worth much anyhow – just left him lying: regular elvish
trick.'
 'We'll see. Come on now! We've talked enough. Let's go and have a look at the
prisoner!
 'What are you going to do with him? Don't forget I spotted him first. If there's any
game, me and my lads must be in it.'
 'Now, now,' growled Shagrat. 'I have my orders. And it's more than my belly's
worth, or yours, to break 'em. Any trespasser found by the guard is to be held at the
tower. Prisoner is to be stripped. Full description of every article, garment, weapon,
letter, ring, or trinket is to be sent to Lugburz at once, and to Lugburz only. And the
prisoner is to be kept safe and intact, under pain of death for every member of the
guard, until He sends or comes Himself. That's plain enough, and that's what I'm
going to do.'
 'Stripped, eh?' said Gorbag. 'What, teeth, nails, hair, and all?'
 'No, none of that. He's for Lugburz, I tell you. He's wanted safe and whole.'
 'You'll find that difficult,' laughed Gorbag. 'He's nothing but carrion now. What
Lugburz will do with such stuff I can't guess. He might as well go in the pot.'
 'You fool,' snarled Shagrat. 'You've been talking very clever, but there's a lot you
 234
don't know, though most other folk do. You'll be for the pot or for Shelob, if you don't
take care. Carrion! Is that all you know of Her Ladyship? When she binds with cords,
she's after meat. She doesn't eat dead meat, nor suck cold blood. This fellow isn't
dead!'
 Sam reeled, clutching at the stone. He felt as if the whole dark world was turning
upside down. So great was the shock that he almost swooned, but even as he fought
to keep a hold on his senses, deep inside him he was aware of the comment: 'You
fool, he isn't dead, and your heart knew it. Don't trust your head, Samwise, it is not
the best part of you. The trouble with you is that you never really had any hope. Now
what is to be done?' Fur the moment nothing, but to prop himself against the
unmoving stone and listen, listen to the vile orc-voices.
 'Garn!' said Shagrat. 'She's got more than one poison. When she's hunting, she
just gives 'em a dab in the neck and they go as limp as boned fish, and then she has
her way with them. D'you remember old Ufthak? We lost him for days. Then we
found him in a corner; hanging up he was, but he was wide awake and glaring. How
we laughed! She'd forgotten him, maybe, but we didn't touch him – no good
interfering with Her. Nar – this little filth, he'll wake up, in a few hours; and beyond
feeling a bit sick for a hit, he'll be all right. Or would be, if Lugburz would let him
alone. And of course, beyond wondering where he is and what's happened to him.'
 'And what's going to happen to him,' laughed Gorbag. 'We can tell him a few
stories at any rate, if we can't do anything else. I don't suppose he's ever been in
lovely Lugburz, so he may like to know what to expect. This is going to be more
funny than I thought. Let's go!'
 'There's going to be no fun, I tell you,' said Shagrat. 'And he's got to be kept safe,
or we're all as good as dead.'
 'All right! But if I were you, I'd catch the big one that's loose, before you send in any
report to Lugburz. It won't sound too pretty to say you've caught the kitten and let the
cat escape.'
 The voices began to move away. Sam heard the sound of feet receding. He was
recovering from his shock, and now a wild fury was on him. 'I got it all wrong!' he
cried. 'I knew I would. Now they've got him, the devils! the filth! Never leave your
master, never, never: that was my right rule. And I knew it in my heart. May I be
forgiven! Now I've got to get back to him. Somehow, somehow!'
 He drew his sword again and beat on the stone with the hilt, but it only gave out a
dull sound. The sword, however, blazed so brightly now that he could see dimly in its
light. To his surprise he noticed that the great block was shaped like a heavy door,
and was less than twice his own height. Above it was a dark blank space between
the top and the low arch of the opening. It was probably only meant to be a stop
against the intrusion of Shelob, fastened on the inside with some latch or bolt beyond
the reach of her cunning. With his remaining strength Sam leaped and caught the
top, scrambled up, and dropped; and then he ran madly, sword blazing in hand,
round a bend and up a winding tunnel.
 The news that his master was still alive roused him to a last effort beyond thought
of weariness. He could not see anything ahead, for this new passage twisted and
turned constantly; but he thought he was catching the two Orcs up: their voices were
growing nearer again. Now they seemed quite close.
 'That's what I'm going to do,' said Shagrat in angry tones. 'Put him right up in the
top chamber.'
 'What for?' growled Gorbag. 'Haven't you any lock-ups down below?'
 'He's going out of harm's way, I tell you,' answered Shagrat. 'See? He's precious. I
 235
don't trust all my lads, and none of yours; nor you neither, when you're mad for fun.
He's going where I want him, and where you won't come, if you don't keep civil. Up
to the top, I say. He'll be safe there.'
 'Will he?' said Sam. 'You're forgetting the great big elvish warrior that's loose!' And
with that he raced round the last corner, only to find that by some trick of the tunnel,
or of the hearing which the Ring gave him, he had misjudged the distance.
 The two orc-figures were still some way ahead. He could see them now, black and
squat against a red glare. The passage ran straight at last, up an incline; and at the
end, wide open, were great double doors, leading probably to deep chambers far
below the high horn of the tower. Already the Orcs with their burden had passed
inside. Gorbag and Shagrat were drawing near the gate.
 Sam heard a burst of hoarse singing, blaring of horns and banging of gongs, a
hideous clamour. Gorbag and Shagrat were already on the threshold.
 Sam yelled and brandished Sting, but his little voice was drowned in the tumult. No
one heeded him.
 The great doors slammed to. Boom. The bars of iron fell into place inside. Clang.
The gate was shut. Sam hurled himself against the bolted brazen plates and fell
senseless to the ground. He was out in the darkness. Frodo was alive but taken by
the Enemy.
 Here ends the second part of the history of the War of the Ring.
 The third part tells of the last defence against the Shadow, and the end of the
mission of the Ring-bearer in The Return of the King. 
