 _Chapter 9_
 The Last Debate
 The morning came after the day of battle, and it was fair with light clouds and the wind turning
westward. Legolas and Gimli were early abroad, and they begged leave to go up into the City; for
they were eager to see Merry and Pippin.
 'It is good to learn that they are still alive,' said Gimli; 'for they cost us great pains in our march
over Rohan, and I would not have such pains all wasted.'
 Together the Elf and the Dwarf entered Minas Tirith, and folk that saw them pass marvelled to
see such companions; for Legolas was fair of face beyond the measure of Men, and he sang an
elven-song in a clear voice as he walked in the morning; but Gimli stalked beside him, stroking his
beard and staring about him.
 'There is some good stone-work here,' he said as he looked at the walls; 'but also some that is
less good, and the streets could be better contrived. When Aragorn comes into his own, I shall offer
him the service of stonewrights of the Mountain, and we will make this a town to be proud of.'
 'They need more gardens,' said Legolas. 'The houses are dead, and there is too little here that
grows and is glad. If Aragorn comes into his own, the people of the Wood shall bring him birds that
sing and trees that do not die.'
 At length they came to the Prince Imrahil, and Legolas looked at him and bowed low; for he saw
that here indeed was one who had elven-blood in his veins. 'Hail, lord!' he said. 'It is long since the
people of Nimrodel left the woodlands of Lórien, and yet still one may see that not all sailed from
Amroth's haven west over water.'
 'So it is said in the lore of my land,' said the Prince; 'yet never has one of the fair folk been seen
there for years beyond count. And I marvel to see one here now in the midst of sorrow and war.
What do you seek?'
 'I am one of the Nine Companions who set out with Mithrandir from Imladris, said Legolas and
with this Dwarf, my friend, I came with the Lord Aragorn. But now we wish to see our friends.
Meriadoc and Peregrin, who are in your keeping, we are told.'
 'You will find them in the Houses of Healing, and I will lead you thither,' said Imrahil.
 'It will be enough if you send one to guide us, lord,' said Legolas. 'For Aragorn sends this
message to you. He does not wish to enter the City again at this time. Yet there is need for the
captains to hold council at once, and he prays that you and Éomer of Rohan will come down to his
tents, as soon as may be. Mithrandir is already there.'
 'We will come,' said Imrahil; and they parted with courteous words.
 'That is a fair lord and a great captain of men,' said Legolas. 'If Gondor has such men still in
these days of fading, great must have been its glory in the days of its rising.'
 'And doubtless the good stone-work is the older and was wrought in the first building,' said
Gimli. 'It is ever so with the things that Men begin: there is a frost in Spring, or a blight in Summer,
and they fail of their promise.'
 'Yet seldom do they fail of their seed,' said Legolas. 'And that will lie in the dust and rot to
spring up again in times and places unlooked-for. The deeds of Men will outlast us, Gimli.'
 'And yet come to naught in the end but might-have-beens, I guess,' said the Dwarf.
 'To that the Elves know not the answer,' said Legolas.
 With that the servant of the Prince came and led them to the Houses of Healing; and there they
found their friends in the garden, and their meeting was a merry one. For a while they walked and
talked, rejoicing for a brief space in peace and rest under the morning high up in the windy circles
of the City. Then when Merry became weary, they went and sat upon the wall with the greensward
of the Houses of Healing behind them; and away southward before them was the Anduin glittering
in the sun, as it flowed away, out of the sight even of Legolas, into the wide flats and green haze of
Lebennin and South Ithilien.
 And now Legolas fell silent, while the others talked, and he looked out against the sun, and as he
gazed he saw white sea-birds beating up the River.
 'Look!' he cried. 'Gulls! They are flying far inland. A wonder they are to me and a trouble to my
heart. Never in all my life had I met them, until we came to Pelargir, and there I heard them crying
in the air as we rode to the battle of the ships. Then I stood still, forgetting war in Middle-earth; for
their wailing voices spoke to me of the Sea. The Sea! Alas! I have not yet beheld it. But deep in the
hearts of all my kindred lies the sea-longing, which it is perilous to stir. Alas! for the gulls. No
peace shall I have again under beech or under elm.'
 'Say not so!' said Gimli. 'There are countless things still to see in Middle-earth, and great works
to do. But if all the fair folk take to the Havens, it will be a duller world for those who are doomed
to stay.'
 'Dull and dreary indeed!' said Merry: 'You must not go to the Havens, Legolas. There will
always be some folk, big or little, and even a few wise dwarves like Gimli, who need you. At least I
hope so. Though I feel somehow that the worst of this war is still to come. How I wish it was all
over, and well over!'
 'Don't be so gloomy!' cried Pippin. 'The Sun is shining, and here we are together for a day or two
at least. I want to hear more about you all. Come, Gimli! You and Legolas have mentioned your
strange journey with Strider about a dozen times already this morning. But you haven't told me
anything about it.'
 'The Sun may shine here,' said Gimli, 'but there are memories of that road that I do not wish to
recall out of the darkness. Had I known what was before me, I think that not for any friendship
would I have taken the Paths of the Dead.'
 'The Paths of the Dead?' said Pippin. 'I heard Aragorn say that and I wondered what he could
mean. Won't you tell us some more?'
 'Not willingly,' said Gimli. 'For upon that road I was put to shame: Gimli Glóin's son, who had
deemed himself more tough than Men, and hardier under earth than any Elf. But neither did I prove;
and I was held to the road only by the will of Aragorn.'
 'And by the love of him also,' said Legolas. 'For all those who come to know him come to love
him after his own fashion, even the cold maiden of the Rohirrim. It was at early morn of the day ere
you came there, Merry, that we left Dunharrow, and such a fear was on all the folk that none would
look on our going, save the Lady Éowyn, who lies now hurt in the House below. There was grief at
that parting, and I was grieved to behold it.'
 'Alas! I had heart only for myself,' said Gimli. 'Nay! I will not speak of that journey.'
 He fell silent; but Pippin and Merry were so eager for news that at last Legolas said: 'I will tell
you enough for your peace; for I felt not the horror, and I feared not the shadows of Men, powerless
and frail as I deemed them.'
 Swiftly then he told of the haunted road under the mountains, and the dark tryst at Erech, and
the great ride thence, ninety leagues and three, to Pelargir on Anduin. 'Four days and nights, and on
into a fifth, we rode from the Black Stone,' he said. 'And lo! in the darkness of Mordor my hope
rose; for in that gloom the Shadow Host seemed to grow stronger and more terrible to look upon.
Some I saw riding, some striding, yet all moving with the same great speed. Silent they were, but
there was a gleam in their eyes. In the uplands of Lamedon they overtook our horses, and swept
round us, and would have passed us by, if Aragorn had not forbidden them.
 'At his command they fell back. "Even the shades of Men are obedient to his will," I thought.
"They may serve his needs yet! "
 'One day of light we rode, and then came the day without dawn, and still we rode on, and Ciril
and Ringló we crossed; and on the third day we came to Linhir above the mouth of Gilrain. And
there men of Lamedon contested the fords with fell folk of Umbar and Harad who had sailed up the
river. But defenders and foes alike gave up the battle and fled when we came, crying out that the
King of the Dead was upon them. Only Angbor, Lord of Lamedon, had the heart to abide us; and
Aragorn bade him gather his folk and come behind, if they dared, when the Grey Host had passed.
 ' "At Pelargir the Heir of Isildur will have need of you," he said.
 'Thus we crossed over Gilrain, driving the allies of Mordor in rout before us; and then we rested
a while. But soon Aragorn arose, saying: "Lo! already Minas Tirith is assailed. I fear that it will fall
ere we come to its aid." So we mounted again before night had passed and went on with all the
speed that our horses could endure over the plains of Lebennin.'
 Legolas paused and sighed, and turning his eyes southward softly he sang:
 _Silver flow the streams from Celos to Erui
 In the green fields of Lebennin!
 Tall grows the grass there. In the wind from the Sea
 The white lilies sway,
 And the golden bells are shaken of mallos and alfirin
 In the green fields of Lebennin,
 In the wind from the Sea!_
 'Green are those fields in the songs of my people; but they were dark then, grey wastes in the
blackness before us. And over the wide land, trampling unheeded the grass and the flowers, we
hunted our foes through a day and a night, until we came at the bitter end to the Great River at last.
 'Then I thought in my heart that we drew near to the Sea; for wide was the water in the darkness,
and sea-birds innumerable cried on its, shores. Alas for the wailing of the gulls! Did not the Lady
tell me to beware of them? And now I cannot forget them.'
 'For my part I heeded them not,' said Gimli; 'for we came then at last upon battle in earnest.
There at Pelargir lay the main fleet of Umbar, fifty great ships and smaller vessels beyond count.
Many of those that we pursued had reached the havens before us, and brought their fear with them;
and some of the ships had put off, seeking to escape down the River or to reach the far shore; and
many of the smaller craft were ablaze. But the Haradrim, being now driven to the brink, turned at
bay, and they were fierce in despair; and they laughed when they looked on us, for they were a
great army still.
 'But Aragorn halted and cried with a great voice: "Now come! By the Black Stone I call you! "
And suddenly the Shadow Host that had hung back at the last came up like a grey tide, sweeping all
away before it. Faint cries I heard, and dim horns blowing, and a murmur as of countless far voices:
it was like the echo of some forgotten battle in the Dark Years long ago. Pale swords were drawn;
but I know not whether their blades would still bite, for the Dead needed no longer any weapon but
fear. None would withstand them.
 'To every ship they came that was drawn up, and then they passed over the water to those that
were anchored; and all the mariners were filled with a madness of terror and leaped overboard, save
the slaves chained to the oars. Reckless we rode among our fleeing foes, driving them like leaves,
until we came to the shore. And then to each of the great ships that remained Aragorn sent one of
the Dúnedain, and they comforted the captives that were aboard, and bade them put aside fear and
be free.
 'Ere that dark day ended none of the enemy were left to resist us all were drowned, or were
flying south in the hope to find their own lands upon foot. Strange and wonderful I thought it that
the designs of Mordor should be overthrown by such wraiths of fear and darkness. With its own
weapons was it worsted!'
 'Strange indeed,' said Legolas. 'In that hour I looked on Aragorn and thought how great and
terrible a Lord he might have become in the strength of his will, had he taken the Ring to himself.
Not for naught does Mordor fear him. But nobler is his spirit than the understanding of Sauron; for
is he not of the children of Lúthien? Never shall that line fail, though the years may lengthen
beyond count.'
 'Beyond the eyes of the Dwarves are such foretellings,' said Gimli. 'But mighty indeed was
Aragorn that day. Lo! all the black fleet was in his hands; and he chose the greatest ship to be his
own, and he went up into it. Then he let sound a great concourse of trumpets taken from the enemy;
and the Shadow Host withdrew to the shore. There they stood silent, hardly to be seen, save for a
red gleam in their eyes that caught the glare of the ships that were burning. And Aragorn spoke in a
loud voice to the Dead Men, crying:
 ' "Hear now the words of the Heir of Isildur! Your oath is fulfilled. Go back and trouble not the
valleys ever again! Depart and be at rest! "
 'And thereupon the King of the Dead stood out before the host and broke his spear and cast it
down. Then he bowed low and turned away; and swiftly the whole grey host drew off and vanished
like a mist that is driven back by a sudden wind; and it seemed to me that I awoke from a dream.
 'That night we rested while others laboured. For there were many captives set free, and many
slaves released who had been folk of Gondor taken in raids; and soon also there was a great
gathering of men out of Lebennin and the Ethir, and Angbor of Lamedon came up with all the
horsemen that he could muster. Now that the fear of the Dead was removed they came to aid us and
to look on the Heir of Isildur; for the rumour of that name had run like fire in the dark.
 'And that is near the end of our tale. For during that evening and night many ships were made
ready and manned; and in the morning the fleet set forth. Long past it now seems, yet it was but the
morn of the day ere yesterday, the sixth since we rode from Dunharrow. But still Aragorn was
driven by fear that time was too short.
 ' "It is forty leagues and two from Pelargir to the landings at the Harlond," he said. "Yet to the
Harlond we must come tomorrow or fail utterly."
 'The oars were now wielded by free men, and manfully they laboured; yet slowly we passed up
the Great River, for we strove against its stream, and though that is not swift down in the South, we
had no help of wind. Heavy would my heart have been, for all our victory at the havens, if Legolas
had not laughed suddenly.
 ' "Up with your beard, Durin's son! " he said. "For thus is it spoken: _Oft hope is born, when all
is forlorn_." But what hope he saw from afar he would not tell. When night came it did but deepen
the darkness, and our hearts were hot, for away in the North we saw a red glow under the cloud,
and Aragorn said: "Minas Tirith is burning."
 'But at midnight hope was indeed born anew. Sea-crafty men of the Ethir gazing southward
spoke of a change coming with a fresh wind from the Sea. Long ere day the masted ships hoisted
sail; and our speed grew, until dawn whitened the foam at our prows. And so it was, as you know,
that we came in the third hour of the morning with a fair wind and the Sun unveiled, and we
unfurled the great standard in battle. It was a great day and a great hour, whatever may come after.'
 'Follow what may, great deeds are not lessened in worth,' said Legolas. 'Great deed was the
riding of the Paths of the Dead, and great it shall remain, though none be left in Gondor to sing of it
in the days that are to come.'
 'And that may well befall,' said Gimli. 'For the faces of Aragorn and Gandalf are grave. Much I
wonder what counsels they are taking in the tents there below. For my part, like Merry, I wish that
with our victory the war was now over. Yet whatever is still to do, I hope to have a part in it, for the
honour of the folk of the Lonely Mountain.'
 'And I for the folk of the Great Wood,' said Legolas, 'and for the love of the Lord of the White
Tree.'
 Then the companions fell silent, but a while they sat there in the high place, each busy with his
own thoughts, while the Captains debated.
 When the Prince Imrahil had parted from Legolas and Gimli, at once he sent for Éomer; and he
went down with him from the City, and they came to the tents of Aragorn that were set up on the
field not far from the place where King Théoden had fallen. And there they took counsel together
with Gandalf and Aragorn and the sons of Elrond.
 'My lords,' said Gandalf, 'listen to the words of the Steward of Gondor before he died: _You
may triumph on the fields of the Pelennor for a day, but against the Power that has now arisen there
is no victory_. I do not bid you despair, as he did, but to ponder the truth in these words.
 'The Stones of Seeing do not lie, and not even the Lord of Barad-dûr can make them do so. He
can, maybe, by his will choose what things shall be seen by weaker minds, or cause them to
mistake the meaning of what they see. Nonetheless it cannot be doubted that when Denethor saw
great forces arrayed against him in Mordor, and more still being gathered, he saw that which truly
is.
 'Hardly has our strength sufficed to beat off the first great assault. The next will be greater. This
war then is without final hope, as Denethor perceived. Victory cannot be achieved by arms,
whether you sit here to endure siege after siege, or march out to be overwhelmed beyond the River.
You have only a choice of evils; and prudence would counsel you to strengthen such strong places
as you have, and there await the onset; for so shall the time before your end be made a little longer.'
 'Then you would have us retreat to Minas Tirith, or Dol Amroth, or to Dunharrow, and there sit
like children on sand-castles when the tide is flowing?' said Imrahil.
 'That would be no new counsel,' said Gandalf. 'Have you not done this and little more in all the
days of Denethor? But no! I said this would be prudent. I do not counsel prudence. I said victory
could not be achieved by arms. I still hope for victory, but not by arms. For into the midst of all
these policies comes the Ring of Power, the foundation of Barad-dûr, and the hope of Sauron.
 'Concerning this thing, my lords, you now all know enough for the understanding of our plight,
and of Sauron's. If he regains it, your valour is vain, and his victory will be swift and complete: so
complete that none can foresee the end of it while this world lasts. If it is destroyed, then he will
fall; and his fall will be so low that none can foresee his arising ever again. For he will lose the best
part of the strength that was native to him in his beginning, and all that was made or begun with
that power will crumble, and he will be maimed for ever, becoming a mere spirit of malice that
gnaws itself in the shadows, but cannot again grow or take shape. And so a great evil of this world
will be removed.
 'Other evils there are that may come; for Sauron is himself but a servant or emissary. Yet it is
not our part to master all the tides of the world, but to do what is in us for the succour of those years
wherein we are set, uprooting the evil in the fields that we know, so that those who live after may
have clean earth to till. What weather they shall have is not ours to rule.
 'Now Sauron knows all this, and he knows that this precious thing which he lost has been found
again; but he does not yet know where it is, or so we hope. And therefore he is now in great doubt.
For if we have found this thing, there are some among us with strength enough to wield it. That too
he knows. For do I not guess rightly, Aragorn, that you have shown yourself to him in the Stone of
Orthanc?'
 'I did so ere I rode from the Hornburg,' answered Aragorn. 'I deemed that the time was ripe, and
that the Stone had come to me for just such a purpose. It was then ten days since the Ring-bearer
went east from Rauros, and the Eye of Sauron, I thought, should be drawn out from his own land.
Too seldom has he been challenged since he returned to his Tower. Though if I had foreseen how
swift would be his onset in answer, maybe I should not have dared to show myself. Bare time was
given me to come to your aid.'
 'But how is this?' asked Éomer. 'All is vain, you say, if he has the Ring. Why should he think it
not vain to assail us, if we have it?'
 'He is not yet sure,' said Gandalf, 'and he has not built up his power by waiting until his enemies
are secure, as we have done. Also we could not learn how to wield the full power all in a day.
Indeed it can be used only by one master alone, not by many; and he will look for a time of strife,
ere one of the great among us makes himself master and puts down the others. In that time the Ring
might aid him, if he were sudden.
 'He is watching. He sees much and hears much. His Nazgûl are still abroad. They passed over
this field ere the sunrise, though few of the weary and sleeping were aware of them. He studies the
signs: the Sword that robbed him of his treasure re-made; the winds of fortune turning in our favour,
and the defeat unlooked-for of his first assault the fall of his great Captain.
 'His doubt will be growing, even as we speak here. His Eye is now straining towards us, blind
almost to all else that is moving. So we must keep it. Therein lies all our hope. This, then, is my
counsel. We have not the Ring. In wisdom or great folly it has been sent away to be destroyed, lest
it destroy us. Without it we cannot by force defeat his force. But we must at all costs keep his Eye
from his true peril. We cannot achieve victory by arms, but by arms we can give the Ring-bearer
his only chance, frail though it be.
 'As Aragorn has begun, so we must go on. We must push Sauron to his last throw. We must call
out his hidden strength, so that he shall empty his land. We must march out to meet him at once.
We must make ourselves the bait, though his jaws should close on us. He will take that bait, in hope
and in greed, for he will think that in such rashness he sees the pride of the new Ringlord: and he
will say: "So! he pushes out his neck too soon and too far. Let him come on, and behold I will have
him in a trap from which he cannot escape. There I will crush him, and what he has taken in his
insolence shall be mine again for ever."
 'We must walk open-eyed into that trap, with courage, but small hope for ourselves. For, my
lords, it may well prove that we ourselves shall perish utterly in a black battle far from the living
lands; so that even if Barad-dûr be thrown down, we shall not live to see a new age. But this, I
deem, is our duty. And better so than to perish nonetheless – as we surely shall, if we sit here – and
know as we die that no new age shall be.'
 They were silent for a while. At length Aragorn spoke. 'As I have begun, so I will go on. We
come now to the very brink, where hope and despair are akin. To waver is to fall. Let none now
reject the counsels of Gandalf, whose long labours against Sauron come at last to their test. But for
him all would long ago have been lost. Nonetheless I do not yet claim to command any man. Let
others choose as they will.'
 Then said Elrohir: 'From the North we came with this purpose, and from Elrond our father we
brought this very counsel. We will not turn back.'
 'As for myself,' said Éomer, 'I have little knowledge of these deep matters; but I need it not. This
I know, and it is enough, that as my friend Aragorn succoured me and my people, so I will aid him
when he calls. I will go.'
 'As for me,' said Imrahil, 'the Lord Aragorn I hold to be my liege-lord, whether he claim it or no.
His wish is to me a command. I will go also. Yet for a while I stand in the place of the Steward of
Gondor, and it is mine to think first of its people. To prudence some heed must still be given. For
we must prepare against all chances, good as well as evil. Now, it may be that we shall triumph,
and while there is any hope of this, Gondor must be protected. I would not have us return with
victory to a City in ruins and a land ravaged behind us. And yet we learn from the Rohirrim that
there is an army still unfought upon our northern flank.'
 'That is true,' said Gandalf. 'I do not counsel you to leave the City all unmanned. Indeed the
force that we lead east need not be great enough for any assault in earnest upon Mordor, so long as
it be great enough to challenge battle. And it must move soon. Therefore I ask the Captains: what
force could we muster and lead out in two days' time at the latest? And they must be hardy men that
go willingly, knowing their peril.'
 'All are weary, and very many have wounds light or grievous,' said Éomer, 'and we have
suffered much loss of our horses, and that is ill to bear. If we must ride soon, then I cannot hope to
lead even two thousands, and yet leave as many for the defence of the City.'
 'We have not only to reckon with those who fought on this field ' said Aragorn. 'New strength is
on the way from the southern fiefs, now that the coasts have been rid. Four thousands I sent
marching from Pelargir through Lossarnach two days ago; and Angbor the fearless rides before
them. If we set out in two days more, they will draw nigh ere we depart. Moreover many were
bidden to follow me up the River in any craft they could gather; and with this wind they will soon
be at hand, indeed several ships have already come to the Harlond. I judge that we could lead out
seven thousands of horse and foot, and yet leave the City in better defence than it was when the
assault began.'
 'The Gate is destroyed,' said Imrahil, 'and where now is the skill to rebuild it and set it up anew?'
 'In Erebor in the Kingdom of Dáin there is such skill,' said Aragorn; 'and if all our hopes do not
perish, then in time I will send Gimli Glóin's son to ask for wrights of the Mountain. But men are
better than gates, and no gate will endure against our Enemy if men desert it.'
 This then was the end of the debate of the lords: that they should set forth on the second
morning from that day with seven thousands, if these might be found; and the great part of this
force should be on foot, because of the evil lands into which they would go. Aragorn should find
some two thousands of those that he had gathered to him in the South; but Imrahil should find three
and a half thousands; and Éomer five hundreds of the Rohirrim who were unhorsed but themselves
warworthy, and he himself should lead five hundreds of his best Riders on horse; and another
company of five hundred horse there should be, among which should ride the sons of Elrond with
the Dúnedain and the knights of Dol Amroth: all told six thousand foot and a thousand horse. But
the main strength of the Rohirrim that remained horsed and able to fight, some three thousand
under the command of Elfhelm, should waylay the West Road against the enemy that was in
Anórien. And at once swift riders were sent out to gather what news they could northwards; and
eastwards from Osgiliath and the road to Minas Morgul.
 And when they had reckoned up all their strength and taken thought for the journeys they should
make and the roads they should choose, Imrahil suddenly laughed aloud.
 'Surely,' he cried, 'this is the greatest jest in all the history of Gondor: that we should ride with
seven thousands, scarce as many as the vanguard of its army in the days of its power, to assail the
mountains and the impenetrable gate of the Black Land! So might a child threaten a mail-clad
knight with a bow of string and green willow! If the Dark Lord knows so much as you say,
Mithrandir, will he not rather smile than fear, and with his little finger crush us like a fly that tries
to sting him?'
 'No, he will try to trap the fly and take the sting,' said Gandalf. 'And there are names among us
that are worth more than a thousand mail-clad knights apiece. No, he will not smile.'
 'Neither shall we,' said Aragorn. 'If this be jest, then it is too bitter for laughter. Nay, it is the last
move in a great jeopardy, and for one side or the other it will bring the end of the game.' Then he
drew Andúril and held it up glittering in the sun. 'You shall not be sheathed again until the last
battle is fought;' he said.
 _Chapter 10_
 The Black Gate Opens
 Two days later the army of the West was all assembled on the Pelennor. The host of Orcs and
Easterlings had turned back out of Anórien, but harried and scattered by the Rohirrim they had
broken and fled with little fighting towards Cair Andros; and with that threat destroyed and new
strength arriving out of the South the City was as well manned as might be. Scouts reported that no
enemies remained upon the roads east as far as the Cross-roads of the Fallen King. All now was
ready for the last throw.
 Legolas and Gimli were to ride again together in the company of Aragorn and Gandalf, who
went in the van with the Dúnedain and the sons of Elrond. But Merry to his shame was not to go
with them.
 'You are not fit for such a journey,' said Aragorn. 'But do not be ashamed. If you do no more in
this war, you have already earned great honour. Peregrin shall go and represent the Shirefolk; and
do not grudge him his chance of peril, for though he has done as well as his fortune allowed him, he
has yet to match your deed. But in truth all now are in like danger. Though it may be our part to
find bitter end before the Gate of Mordor, if we do so, then you will come also to a last stand, either
here or wherever the black tide overtakes you. Farewell!'
 And so despondently Merry now stood and watched the mustering of the army. Bergil was with
him, and he also was downcast; for his father was to march leading a company of the Men of the
City: he could not rejoin the Guard until his case was judged. In that same company Pippin was
also to go, as a soldier of Gondor. Merry could see him not far off, a small but upright figure
among the tall men of Minas Tirith.
 At last the trumpets rang and the army began to move. Troop by troop, and company by
company, they wheeled and went off eastward. And long after they had passed away out of sight
down the great road to the Causeway, Merry stood there. The last glint of the morning sun on spear
and helm twinkled and was lost, and still he remained with bowed head and heavy heart, feeling
friendless and alone. Everyone that he cared for had gone away into the gloom that hung over the
distant eastern sky; and little hope at all was left in his heart that he would ever see any of them
again.
 As if recalled by his mood of despair, the pain in his arm returned, and he felt weak and old, and
the sunlight seemed thin. He was roused by the touch of Bergil's hand.
 'Come, Master Perian!' said the lad. 'You are still in pain, I see. I will help you back to the
Healers. But do not fear! They will come back. The Men of Minas Tirith will never be overcome.
And now they have the Lord Elfstone, and Beregond of the Guard too.'
 Ere noon the army came to Osgiliath. There all the workers and craftsmen that could be spared
were busy. Some were strengthening the ferries and boat-bridges that the enemy had made and in
part destroyed when they fled; some gathered stores and booty; and others on the eastern side
across the River were throwing up hasty works of defence.
 The vanguard passed on through the ruins of Old Gondor, and over the wide River, and on up
the long straight road that in the high days had been made to run from the fair Tower of the Sun to
the tall Tower of the Moon, which now was Minas Morgul in its accursed vale. Five miles beyond
Osgiliath they halted, ending their first day's march.
 But the horsemen pressed on and ere evening they came to the Cross-roads and the great ring of
trees, and all was silent. No sign of any enemy had they seen, no cry or call had been heard, no
shaft had sped from rock or thicket by the way, yet ever as they went forward they felt the
watchfulness of the land increase. Tree and stone, blade and leaf were listening. The darkness had
been dispelled, and far away westward sunset was on the Vale of Anduin, and the white peaks of
the mountains blushed in the blue air; but a shadow and a gloom brooded upon the Ephel Dúath.
 Then Aragorn set trumpeters at each of the four roads that ran into the ring of trees, and they
blew a great fanfare, and the heralds cried aloud: 'The Lords of Gondor have returned and all this
land that is theirs they take back.' The hideous orc-head that was set upon the carven figure was
cast down and broken in pieces, and the old king's head was raised and set in its place once more,
still crowned with white and golden flowers: and men laboured to wash and pare away all the foul
scrawls that orcs had put upon the stone.
Now in their debate some had counselled that Minas Morgul should first be assailed, and if they
might take it, it should be utterly destroyed. 'And, maybe,' said Imrahil, 'the road that leads thence
to the pass above will prove an easier way of assault upon the Dark Lord than his northern gate.'
 But against this Gandalf had spoken urgently, because of the evil that dwelt in the valley, where
the minds of living men would turn to madness and horror, and because also of the news that
Faramir had brought. For if the Ring-bearer had indeed attempted that way, then above all they
should not draw the Eye of Mordor thither. So the next day when the main host came up, they set a
strong guard upon the Cross-roads to make some defence, if Mordor should send a force over the
Morgul Pass, or should bring more men up from the South. For that guard they chose mostly
archers who knew the ways of Ithilien and would lie hid in the woods and slopes about the meeting
of the ways. But Gandalf and Aragorn rode with the vanguard to the entrance of Morgul Vale and
looked on the evil city.
 It was dark and lifeless; for the Orcs and lesser creatures of Mordor that had dwelt there had
been destroyed in battle, and the Nazgûl were abroad. Yet the air of the valley was heavy with fear
and enmity. Then they broke the evil bridge and set red flames in the noisome fields and departed.
 The day after, being the third day since they set out from Minas Tirith, the army began its
northward march along the road. It was some hundred miles by that way from the Cross-roads to
the Morannon, and what might befall them before they came so far none knew They went openly
but heedfully, with mounted scouts before them on the road, and others on foot upon either side,
especially on the eastward flank; for there lay dark thickets, and a tumbled land of rocky ghylls and
crags, behind which the long grim slopes of the Ephel Dúath clambered up. The weather of the
world remained fair and the wind held in the west, but nothing could waft away the glooms and the
sad mists that clung about the Mountains of Shadow; and behind them at whiles great smokes
would arise and hover in the upper winds.
 Ever and anon Gandalf let blow the trumpets, and the heralds would cry: "The Lords of Gondor
are come! Let all leave this land or yield them up!' But Imrahil said: 'Say not _The Lords of
Gondor_. Say _The King Elessar_. For that is true, even though he has not yet sat upon the throne;
and it will give the Enemy more thought, if the heralds use that name.' And thereafter thrice a day
the heralds proclaimed the coming of the King Elessar. But none answered the challenge.
 Nonetheless, though they marched in seeming peace, the hearts of all the army, from the highest
to the lowest, were downcast, and with every mile that they went north foreboding of evil grew
heavier on them. It was near the end of the second day of their march from the Cross-roads that
they first met any offer of battle. For a strong force of Orcs and Easterlings attempted to take their
leading companies in an ambush; and that was in the very place where Faramir had waylaid the
men of Harad, and the road went in a deep cutting through an out-thrust of the eastward hills. But
the Captains of the West were well warned by their scouts, skilled men from Henneth Annûn led by
Mablung; and so the ambush was itself trapped. For horsemen went wide about westward and came
up on the flank of the enemy and from behind, and they were destroyed or driven east into the hills.
 But the victory did little to enhearten the captains. 'It is but a feint,' said Aragorn; 'and its chief
purpose, I deem, was rather to draw us on by a false guess of our Enemy's weakness than to do us
much hurt, yet.' And from that evening onward the Nazgûl came and followed every move of the
army. They still flew high and out of sight of all save Legolas, and yet their presence could be felt,
as a deepening of shadow and a dimming of the sun; and though the Ringwraiths did not yet stoop
low upon their foes and were silent, uttering no cry, the dread of them could not be shaken off.
 So time and the hopeless journey wore away. Upon the fourth day from the Cross-roads and the
sixth from Minas Tirith they came at last to the end of the living lands, and began to pass into the
desolation that lay before the gates of the Pass of Cirith Gorgor; and they could descry the marshes
and the desert that stretched north and west to the Emyn Muil. So desolate were those places and so
deep the horror that lay on them that some of the host were unmanned, and they could neither walk
nor ride further north.
 Aragorn looked at them, and there was pity in his eyes rather than wrath; for these were young
men from Rohan, from Westfold far away, or husbandmen from Lossarnach, and to them Mordor
had been from childhood a name of evil, and yet unreal, a legend that had no part in their simple
life; and now they walked like men in a hideous dream made true, and they understood not this war
nor why fate should lead them to such a pass.
 'Go!' said Aragorn. 'But keep what honour you may, and do not run! And there is a task which
you may attempt and so be not wholly shamed. Take your way south-west till you come to Cair
Andros, and if that is still held by enemies, as I think, then re-take it, if you can; and hold it to the
last in defence of Gondor and Rohan!'
 Then some being shamed by his mercy overcame their fear and went on, and the others took
new hope, hearing of a manful deed within their measure that they could turn to, and they departed.
And so, since many men had already been left at the Cross-roads, it was with less than six
thousands that the Captains of the West came at last to challenge the Black Gate and the might of
Mordor.
 They advanced now slowly, expecting at every hour some answer to their challenge, and they
drew together, since it was but waste of men to send out scouts or small parties from the main host.
At nightfall of the fifth day of the march from Morgul Vale they made their last camp, and set fires
about it of such dead wood and heath as they could find. They passed the hours of night in
wakefulness and they were aware of many things half-seen that walked and prowled all about them,
and they heard the howling of wolves. The wind had died and all the air seemed still. They could
see little, for though it was cloudless and the waxing moon was four nights old, there were smokes
and fumes that rose out of the earth and the white crescent was shrouded in the mists of Mordor.
 It grew cold. As morning came the wind began to stir again, but now it came from the North,
and soon it freshened to a rising breeze. All the night-walkers were gone, and the land seemed
empty. North amid their noisome pits lay the first of the great heaps and hills of slag and broken
rock and blasted earth, the vomit of the maggot-folk of Mordor; but south and now near loomed the
great rampart of Cirith Gorgor, and the Black Gate amidmost, and the two Towers of the Teeth tall
and dark upon either side. For in their last march the Captains had turned away from the old road as
it bent east, and avoided the peril of the lurking hills, and so now they were approaching the
Morannon from the north-west, even as Frodo had done.
 The two vast iron doors of the Black Gate under its frowning arch were fast closed. Upon the
battlement nothing could be seen. All was silent but watchful. They were come to the last end of
their folly, and stood forlorn and chill in the grey light of early day before towers and walls which
their army could not assault with hope, not even if it had brought thither engines of great power,
and the Enemy had no more force than would suffice for the manning of the gate and wall alone.
Yet they knew that all the hills and rocks about the Morannon were filled with hidden foes, and the
shadowy defile beyond was bored and tunnelled by teeming broods of evil things. And as they
stood they saw all the Nazgûl gathered together, hovering above the Towers of the Teeth like
vultures; and they knew that they were watched. But still the Enemy made no sign.
 No choice was left them but to play their part to its end. Therefore Aragorn now set the host in
such array as could best be contrived; and they were drawn up on two great hills of blasted stone
and earth that orcs had piled in years of labour. Before them towards Mordor lay like a moat a great
mire of reeking mud and foul-smelling pools. When all was ordered, the Captains rode forth
towards the Black Gate with a great guard of horsemen and the banner and heralds and trumpeters.
There was Gandalf as chief herald, and Aragorn with the sons of Elrond, and Éomer of Rohan, and
Imrahil; and Legolas and Gimli and Peregrin were bidden to go also, so that all the enemies of
Mordor should have a witness.
 They came within cry of the Morannon, and unfurled the banner, and blew upon their trumpets;
and the heralds stood out and sent their voices up over the battlement of Mordor.
 'Come forth!' they cried. 'Let the Lord of the Black Land come forth! Justice shall be done upon
him. For wrongfully he has made war upon Gondor and wrested its lands. Therefore the King of
Gondor demands that he should atone for his evils, and depart then for ever. Come forth!'
 There was a long silence, and from wall and gate no cry or sound was heard in answer. But
Sauron had already laid his plans, and he had a mind first to play these mice cruelly before he
struck to kill. So it was that, even as the Captains were about to turn away, the silence was broken
suddenly. There came a long rolling of great drums like thunder in the mountains, and then a
braying of horns that shook the very stones and stunned men's ears. And thereupon the middle door
of the Black Gate was thrown open with a great clang, and out of it there came an embassy from
the Dark Tower.
 At its head there rode a tall and evil shape, mounted upon a black horse, if horse it was; for it
was huge and hideous, and its face was a frightful mask, more like a skull than a living head, and in
the sockets of its eyes and in its nostrils there burned a flame. The rider was robed all in black, and
black was his lofty helm; yet this was no Ringwraith but a living man. The Lieutenant of the Tower
of Barad-dûr he was, and his name is remembered in no tale; for he himself had forgotten it, and he
said: 'I am the Mouth of Sauron.' But it is told that he was a renegade, who came of the race of
those that are named the Black Númenóreans; for they established their dwellings in Middle-earth
during the years of Sauron's domination, and they worshipped him, being enamoured of evil
knowledge. And he entered the service of the Dark Tower when it first rose again, and because of
his cunning he grew ever higher in the Lord's favour; and he learned great sorcery, and knew much
of the mind of Sauron; and he was more cruel than any orc.
 He it was that now rode out, and with him came only a small company of black-harnessed
soldiery, and a single banner, black but bearing on it in red the Evil Eye. Now halting a few paces
before the Captains of the West he looked them up and down and laughed.
 'Is there anyone in this rout with authority to treat with me?' he asked. 'Or indeed with wit to
understand me? Not thou at least!' he mocked, turning to Aragorn with scorn. 'It needs more to
make a king than a piece of elvish glass, or a rabble such as this. Why, any brigand of the hills can
show as good a following!'
 Aragorn said naught in answer, but he took the other's eye and held it, and for a moment they
strove thus; but soon, though Aragorn did not stir nor move hand to weapon, the other quailed and
gave back as if menaced with a blow. 'I am a herald and ambassador, and may not be assailed!' he
cried.
 'Where such laws hold,' said Gandalf, 'it is also the custom for ambassadors to use less insolence.
But no one has threatened you. You have naught to fear from us, until your errand is done. But
unless your master has come to new wisdom, then with all his servants you will be in great peril.'
 'So!' said the Messenger. 'Then thou art the spokesman, old greybeard? Have we not heard of
thee at whiles, and of thy wanderings, ever hatching plots and mischief at a safe distance? But this
time thou hast stuck out thy nose too far, Master Gandalf; and thou shalt see what comes to him
who sets his foolish webs before the feet of Sauron the Great. I have tokens that I was bidden to
show to thee – to thee in especial, if thou shouldst dare to come.' He signed to one of his guards,
and he came forward bearing a bundle swathed in black cloths.
 The Messenger put these aside, and there to the wonder and dismay of all the Captains he held
up first the short sword that Sam had carried, and next a grey cloak with an elven-brooch, and last
the coat of mithril-mail that Frodo had worn wrapped in his tattered garments. A blackness came
before their eyes, and it seemed to them in a moment of silence that the world stood still, but their
hearts were dead and their last hope gone. Pippin who stood behind Prince Imrahil sprang forward
with a cry of grief.
 'Silence!' said Gandalf sternly, thrusting him back; but the Messenger laughed aloud.
 'So you have yet another of these imps with you!' he cried. 'What use you find in them I cannot
guess; but to send them as spies into Mordor is beyond even your accustomed folly. Still, I thank
him, for it is plain that this brat at least has seen these tokens before, and it would be vain for you to
deny them now.'
 'I do not wish to deny them,' said Gandalf. 'Indeed, I know them all and all their history, and
despite your scorn, foul Mouth of Sauron, you cannot say as much. But why do you bring them
here?'
 'Dwarf-coat, elf-cloak, blade of the downfallen West, and spy from the little rat-land of the
Shire-nay; do not start! We know it well – here are the marks of a conspiracy. Now, maybe he that
bore these things was a creature that you would not grieve to lose, and maybe otherwise: one dear
to you, perhaps? If so, take swift counsel with what little wit is left to you. For Sauron does not
love spies, and what his fate shall be depends now on your choice.'
 No one answered him; but he saw their faces grey with fear and the horror in their eyes, and he
laughed again, for it seemed to him that his sport went well. 'Good, good!' he said. 'He was dear to
you, I see. Or else his errand was one that you did not wish to fail? It has. And now he shall endure
the slow torment of years, as long and slow as our arts in the Great Tower can contrive, and never
be released, unless maybe when he is changed and broken, so that he may come to you, and you
shall see what you have done. This shall surely be-unless you accept my Lord's terms.'
 'Name the terms,' said Gandalf steadily, but those nearby saw the anguish in his face, and now
he seemed an old and wizened man, crushed, defeated at last. They did not doubt that he would
accept.
 'These are the terms,' said the Messenger, and smiled as he eyed them one by one. 'The rabble of
Gondor and its deluded allies shall withdraw at once beyond the Anduin, first taking oaths never
again to assail Sauron the Great in arms, open or secret. All lands east of Anduin shall be Sauron's
for ever, solely. West of the Anduin as far as the Misty Mountains and the Gap of Rohan shall be
tributary to Mordor, and men there shall bear no weapons, but shall have leave to govern their own
affairs. But they shall help to rebuild Isengard which they have wantonly destroyed, and that shall
be Sauron's, and there his lieutenant shall dwell: not Saruman, but one more worthy of trust.'
 Looking in the Messenger's eyes they read his thought. He was to be that lieutenant, and gather
all that remained of the West under his sway; he would be their tyrant and they his slaves.
 But Gandalf said: 'This is much to demand for the delivery of one servant: that your Master
should receive in exchange what he must else fight many a war to gain! Or has the field of Gondor
destroyed his hope in war, so that he falls to haggling? And if indeed we rated this prisoner so high,
what surety have we that Sauron the Base Master of Treachery, will keep his part? Where is this
prisoner? Let him be brought forth and yielded to us, and then we will consider these demands.'
 It seemed then to Gandalf, intent, watching him as a man engaged in fencing with a deadly foe,
that for the taking of a breath the Messenger was at a loss; yet swiftly he laughed again.
'Do not bandy words in your insolence with the Mouth of Sauron!' he cried. 'Surety you crave!
Sauron gives none. If you sue for his clemency you must first do his bidding. These are his terms.
Take them or leave them!'
 'These we will take!' said Gandalf suddenly. He cast aside his cloak and a white light shone forth
like a sword in that black place. Before his upraised hand the foul Messenger recoiled, and Gandalf
coming seized and took from him the tokens: coat, cloak, and sword. 'These we will take in
memory of our friend,' he cried. 'But as for your terms, we reject them utterly. Get you gone, for
your embassy is over and death is near to you. We did not come here to waste words in treating
with Sauron, faithless and accursed; still less with one of his slaves. Begone!'
 Then the Messenger of Mordor laughed no more. His face was twisted with amazement and
anger to the likeness of some wild beast that, as it crouches on its prey, is smitten on the muzzle
with a stinging rod. Rage filled him and his mouth slavered, and shapeless sounds of fury came
strangling from his throat. But he looked at the fell faces of the Captains and their deadly eyes, and
fear overcame his wrath. He gave a great cry, and turned, leaped upon his steed, and with his
company galloped madly back to Cirith Gorgor. But as they went his soldiers blew their horns in
signal long arranged; and even before they came to the gate Sauron sprang his trap.
 Drums rolled and fires leaped up. The great doors of the Black Gate swung back wide. Out of it
streamed a great host as swiftly as swirling waters when a sluice is lifted.
 The Captains mounted again and rode back, and from the host of Mordor there went up a jeering
yell. Dust rose smothering the air, as from nearby there marched up an army of Easterlings that had
waited for the signal in the shadows of Ered Lithui beyond the further Tower. Down from the hills
on either side of the Morannon poured Orcs innumerable. The men of the West were trapped, and
soon. all about the grey mounds where they stood, forces ten times and more than ten times their
match would ring them in a sea of enemies. Sauron had taken the proffered bait in jaws of steel.
 Little time was left to Aragorn for the ordering of his battle. Upon the one hill he stood with
Gandalf, and there fair and desperate was raised the banner of the Tree and Stars. Upon the other
hill hard by stood the banners of Rohan and Dol Amroth, White Horse and Silver Swan. And about
each hill a ring was made facing all ways, bristling with spear and sword. But in the front towards
Mordor where the first bitter assault would come there stood the sons of Elrond on the left with the
Dúnedain about them, and on the right the Prince Imrahil with the men of Dol Amroth tall and fair,
and picked men of the Tower of Guard.
 The wind blew, and the trumpets sang, and arrows whined; but the sun now climbing towards
the South was veiled in the reeks of Mordor, and through a threatening haze it gleamed, remote, a
sullen red, as if it were the ending of the day, or the end maybe of all the world of light. And out of
the gathering mirk the Nazgûl came with. their cold voices crying words of death; and then all hope
was quenched.
 Pippin had bowed crushed with horror when he heard Gandalf reject the terms and doom Frodo
to the torment of the Tower; but he had mastered himself, and now he stood beside Beregond in the
front rank of Gondor with Imrahil's men. For it seemed best to him to die soon and leave the bitter
story of his life, since all was in ruin.
 'I wish Merry was here,' he heard himself saying, and quick thoughts raced through his mind,
even as he watched the enemy come charging to the assault. 'Well, well, now at any rate I
understand poor Denethor a little better. We might die together, Merry and I, and since die we must,
why not? Well, as he is not here, I hope he'll find an easier end. But now I must do my best.'
 He drew his sword and looked at it, and the intertwining shapes of red and gold; and the flowing
characters of Númenor glinted like fire upon the blade. 'This was made for just such an hour,' he
thought. 'If only I could smite that foul Messenger with it, then almost I should draw level with old
Merry. Well, I'll smite some of this beastly brood before the end. I wish I could see cool sunlight
and green grass again!'
 Then even as he thought these things the first assault crashed into them. The orcs hindered by
the mires that lay before the hills halted and poured their arrows into the defending ranks. But
through them there came striding up, roaring like beasts, a great company of hill-trolls out of
Gorgoroth. Taller and broader than Men they were, and they were clad only in close-fitting mesh of
horny scales, or maybe that was their hideous hide; but they bore round bucklers huge and black
and wielded heavy hammers in their knotted hands. Reckless they sprang into the pools and waded
across, bellowing as they came. Like a storm they broke upon the line of the men of Gondor, and
beat upon helm and head, and arm and shield as smiths hewing the hot bending iron. At Pippin's
side Beregond was stunned and overborne, and he fell; and the great troll-chief that smote him
down bent over him, reaching out a clutching claw; for these fell creatures would bite the throats of
those that they threw down.
 Then Pippin stabbed upwards, and the written blade of Westernesse pierced through the hide
and went deep into the vitals of the troll, and his black blood came gushing out. He toppled forward
and came crashing down like a falling rock, burying those beneath him. Blackness and stench and
crushing pain came upon Pippin, and his mind fell away into a great darkness.
 'So it ends as I guessed it would,' his thought said, even as it fluttered away; and it laughed a
little within him ere it fled, almost gay it seemed to be casting off at last all doubt and care and fear.
And then even as it winged away into forgetfulness it heard voices, and they seemed to be crying in
some forgotten world far above:
 'The Eagles are coming! The Eagles are coming!'
 For one moment more Pippin's thought hovered. 'Bilbo!' it said. 'But no! That came in his tale,
long long ago. This is my tale, and it is ended now. Good-bye!' And his thought fled far away and
his eyes saw no more. 
